Chapter 21 – A Visit, Vengeance, and Release
	John Brogan was surprised when he saw Jarrod riding near the cabin that he and Miguel hid. His first thought was to ambush his coworker, but he thought better of it fearing it may be some sort of trap, and watched to make sure that his coworker was not followed. Jarrod had Brogan’s horse with him along with a pack mule loaded with supplies. It was an enticing sight for men who hadn’t eaten for almost half a week. Caution still ruled Brogan’s actions and he waited until he was sure that it was okay to expose his position. Brogan waited until the very last minute before burst he through the cabin door and whistled to get Jarrod’s attention. It took several whistles before Jarrod spotted Brogan. Jarrod changed direction when he spotted Brogan and started riding toward him. Brogan watched his coworker with an expression of curiosity and amazement that he kept on his face until Jarrod was right up on them.
	“How’d you know we’d be here?” Brogan asked not making any effort to hide his sense of joy and relief.
	“I figured you’d hide out in a place that you knew well. The others in town thought that since you had horses that you’d have headed back east, but I kind of felt that that was the last direction you’d go.” Jarrod said. “Who’s your friend?” He asked looking past Brogan at Miguel who had stepped out of the cabin.
	Brogan turned his head briefly and then looked back at Jarrod. “Him, he’s someone who was in that hole I was in with me. It was either kill him or bring him along.” Brogan said walking past Jarrod to his horse Tinker to greet her.
	“Why him?” Jarrod asked Brogan as he passed.
	“What?”
	“Why keep him alive.” Jarrod asked Brogan mockingly.
	“There was no bounty on him, and besides, out here two get along better than one. You know that.” Brogan replied. Jarrod turned to look away from Brogan as though he did not like the answer. “Why’d you do it?” Brogan asked. 
Jarrod lowered his head and took a moment to think. “Cause the faster and further you go the less likely it is you’ll be back.” Jarrod replied lifting his chin from his chest to look directly at Brogan.
“I don’t like you Brogan. You’re a mad dog on a long leash. With this, I am cutting that leash and letting you roam free until your madness kills you.” Jarrod said as he stared at him. 
Brogan shifted uncomfortably. “Well, thanks anyhow.” Brogan said as he mounted his horse and motioned for Miguel to gather the supplies that Jarrod brought.
Jarrod, seeing that he was free of his burden, turned his horse around and took one last look at Brogan. “May God have mercy on your soul.” He said and spurred his horse forward before either man had a chance to respond. Brogan and Miguel watched him as he rode away and disappeared from view.

For days Brogan and Miguel rode across a vast flat plain with a snowcapped range of mountains in the background. They forded stream after stream. On the far bank of the stream, they would gallop away into the sagebrush spotted plain beyond, until the sight of them was lost in the depths of the panorama.


By time the two men had reached the New Mexico territory, the color of the rocks had changed from sulfur yellow to ferrous red. John Brogan and Miguel stopped at a shallow river to rest and water their horses as they rode through the treacherous mountain trails. John Brogan got off his horse to stretch his legs. He walked over to Miguel.
“How much further?” John Brogan asked. 
“Why, saddle sores starting to bother you?” Miguel replied.
“No, I just want to get to where I am going.”
“Another week if we don’t get stopped by another deputy.”
“I’m not going to happen again.” John Brogan said and walked back to his horse. He mounted it and the two men rode off.

A campfire was burning. John Brogan was asleep on his bedroll next to the fire. Miguel was leaning against a large rock. He drifted in and out of sleep. The silhouette of bear could be seen against the light of a half moon. Miguel had fallen asleep. He was crouched down against the rock that he leaned against. The pace of the bear quickened to a trot. The bear cried out before it attacked the sleeping Miguel. The bear decapitated Miguel in a single swipe. The disturbance awakened Brogan. Brogan instinctively rolled away from his bedroll into the darkness and away from the bear. He got to his feet with his Le Mat at the ready. He fired all nine of the revolver’s rounds into the bear. The bear was slowed considerably but was still able to reach Brogan and took a swipe at him that grazed his face, arm, and chest. Brogan responded by unloading the shell in the gun’s shotgun barrel and the bear fell to the ground dead. Brogan stumbled back into a tree. His body slid down its trunk. He was in shock and exhausted. Brogan passed out.
*	*	*	*
A wind kicked up a wall of dust that lowered the visibility to near zero in the sleepy Sonoran desert town. The cactus that gave way to buildings of wood and adobe soaked up the spring sun as it beat down. Alone on horseback John Brogan rode into the town. It appeared as though the wind, to avoid contact with him, blew around him. He rider was not fazed by the windstorm. The wind died down considerably as the rider reached the center of town. He rode up to the saloon, got off the horse, and brusquely dusts himself off before he went into the saloon. John Brogan was hardly recognizable when he walked into the saloon. He was dirty, scarred, and exhausted by his journey. Brogan walked up and dropped a gold coin on the bar to get the bartender’s attention. The bartender turned around from the cash register and approached the weathered John Brogan cautiously.
“Whiskey, a bottle if you’ve got one.” John Brogan said. The bartender pulled a bottle and a shot glass out from under the bar. He took the coin from Brogan and made change. He left the change next to the bottle that he gave John Brogan. Some time later, Deputy Doonan entered the saloon. He walked up to Brogan and looked him over. The bottle of whiskey Brogan drank was one third empty.
“You’re new in town. I don’t think we’ve met?” Deputy Doonan said.
“Yes new.” John Brogan replied surly.
“You look like a drifter. Are you a drifter? This is a quiet town.” Deputy Doonan said.
Brogan poured and drank a shot then looked Deputy Doonan over. “I am here to get cleaned up and settle a debt. I believe there is a man here that I owe a great deal.” Brogan said.
“Who’d that be?” The deputy asked.
“Ira Owen.” Brogan replied.
“The land agent? You don’t look like the type who would know him.” The deputy replied with tone that implied doubt.
“The major and I go way back.” Brogan said.
“You two fought in the war together?” The deputy asked.
“Something like that. Now if you would leave me to finish my drink.” Brogan said.
“Sure.” The deputy replied with a tinge of doubt. The deputy turned and started to leave.
“Deputy, where can I get a decent bath and a room?” Brogan asked.
The deputy turned back around to face Brogan. “Stacey’s Bed and Livery, but you’d better hurry. She closes early on Saturdays.” The deputy said and walked out.

Brogan stepped out of the saloon on his way to get a room and get cleaned up when Ira Owen stepped out of his office. He could not have been more excited than if the heavens parted and its entrance was exposed. His heart pounded and fingers tingled. He had to use all of his strength to stop himself from walking up to Owen and shooting him dead. His urge quelled by his long felt desire that Owen was a man that deserved to suffer the same as those who suffered because of his act of betrayal. Brogan watched Owen as he walked two offices over and entered the sheriff’s office. Brogan frowned realizing that Owen had people that could help him so close, but he was still dumbfounded and waited for Owen to walk out of the sheriff’s office which he did a few minutes later. By then, Brogan had gathered his wits about him and started across the street as Owen closed the sheriff’s office door. Brogan picked up his pace as he walked across the street anxious to meet up with Owen once again. Brogan paced himself so that he stood by the hitching post in front of Owen’s office when he passed. Brogan’s body felt as though it were a torch, and as Owen walked by he sensed something unusual about the man who stood nearby watching him. Owen turned around before he put the key into the lock of his office door.
“Can I help you?” Owen asked Brogan. Brogan could not answer but his expression be intensified. “Are you okay?” Owen asked unsure whether or not he should approach the man that watched him from the street with such intensity.
Finally Brogan was able to spit out. “Remember me?” He asked and waited for Owen to respond ready to rip him apart with his bare hands. Owen squinted as he looked Brogan over trying to figure out if he knew that man that stood in front of him. Owen paused and closed his eyes as he replayed the sound of the voice that just spoke to him. Owen realized that the voice was familiar, but he was unable to place the face.
“Do I know you?” Owen asked.
“You don’t remember?” Brogan replied. Owen closed his eyes and thought hard. On hearing the voice again he realized it was an echo from his past. The memory struck him with the force of a lightning bolt. 
“Brogan?!”
“Yes, me Brogan.”
“But you were reported dead? I mean I thought you were dead. I . . .” Ira Owen’s thought was interrupted by the arrival of his housekeeper Sulema. Sulema was a young, petite, Mexican woman with pitch black hair and large engaging brown eyes.
“Mister Owen.” She said after she opened the office door from the inside. “Come in.” She added. Ira Owen followed Sulema’s suggestion leaving Brogan outside.
“That is not a good man Mister Owen.” Sulema said.
“He was one of the men under my command during the war.” Ira Owen said plaintiffly.
“He may have been but you should not trust him now. I saw how he looked at you. It was not good.”
“Perhaps you are right.” Ira Owen said.
“I am right.” Sulema replied and led Ira Owen through his office to the door that led to his home in the rear.
Brogan, as if becoming conscious after sleepwalking, turned and walked down the street to the boarding house to get a room, a bath, a haircut, and a shave.

Ira Owen pulled a book from the bookcase in front of his desk. He walked back to his desk using his cane and sat uncomfortably in his seat.  A clean, nevertheless scarred and thin, John Brogan walked into the office. The bell on the door jingled when he opened and closed it behind him. John Brogan walked over to Ira Owen’s desk and sat in the seat in front of it. Ira Owen stared at the man seated in front of him.
“You do not remember me.” John Brogan said.
Ira Owen looked even more intently at the man in front of him. “Brogan?” Ira Owen said. 
John Brogan sat up and leaned in closer to Ira Owen. “That’s right, its me. Brogan.” John Brogan said.
“I was told that you died.” Ira Owen said in a cold serious tone.
John Brogan leaned back in his chair. “Perhaps, that was what you wished would have happened.” John Brogan said.
“No, not at all. You were my best soldier.” 
“Then why did you send me and the colonel to our deaths?”
“It was war. When you go to into battle, there are no guarantees.” Ira Owen said credulous almost offended.
“Not when there’s treachery.”
“My God, Brogan. You’re starting to sound like that colonel. If there’s anyone to blame it’s him.”
“And why is that?” 
“He was also getting himself entangled in some bloody affair. He thrived on it.” 
“Strange, he told me that it was you who betrayed us?” 
“Why? How?” Ira Owen asked challengingly.
“He didn’t say. He died before he could get a chance to tell his story. He did ask me to do one thing.” John Brogan said as he pulled out the colonel’s Le Mat and pointed it at Ira Owen.
“No, Brogan don’t, don’t it wasn’t me, it wasn’t me! You don’t understand! ” Ira Owen said.
John Brogan pulled the trigger and put a revolver round in Ira Owen. Brogan’s victim was wounded but not dead. John Brogan stared at him briefly as he thought about what to do next. He sat and debated with himself whether he should make than in front of him suffer a slow death or settle the debt quickly and move on. Outside he could hear the stir of people reacting to the sound of gunfire. Brogan pulled the gun’s hammer back for the shotgun shell. He fully intended to scatter the flesh of the man in front of him throughout the room. That was when the door to the living quarters burst open and the petite Sulema stood there holding a Colt 45. It barely fit in her hand. Brogan looked at her and started to laugh. It started as a giggle that turned into a full belly laugh. That was when Sulema’s tiny fingers squeezed the trigger of the gun she held. Her shot hit her target and Brogan fell to the floor. On the floor he could feel the chest wound and the flow of blood from it. Sulema dropped the gun and ran over to Ira Owen. Brogan could hear the jingle of the door open and close and the faces of strangers staring down at him. As Brogan lay bleeding to death, his soul residing in that space between life and death, heaven and hell, consciousness and unconsciousness he could hear the voice of Cassie calling for him like she did back in Missouri. His last earthly action was to smile knowing that he was only minutes away from residing with her forever.
THE END

