Chapter 6 – The Colonel’s Charge
	The twilight of the early morning slowly began to loosen the grip that darkness held as the soldiers on their horse formed into two separate companies. A thoughtful quiet filled the air of the fall morning. The soldiers, some sleepy, others lost in the thoughts that soldiers have before they go into battle avoided looking at each other. Captain Brogan rode up from out of the darkness into the view of the men of the two companies. Sergeant Devereaux, sitting at the head of A company, leaned forward and whispered in the ear of his horse Compass just before the captain reined his horse to stop in front of the two formations. The captain looked the two formations over and looked toward his first sergeant. Sergeant Devereaux sat up on his horse to see Major Owen exiting his tent and approach the formation with a limp and leaning on his walking stick.
The captain turned his horse to face the major as he approached. The sergeants called their respective units to attention at the major’s approach. The captain saluted the major as he came to a stop at the side of the captain’s horse. The major returned the salute and gestures for the captain to dismount.
“Captain, my final orders to you are to disengage at your first opportunity. Do not get entangled in a skirmish if at all possible.” The major said.
“Sir, I thought that was the plan. We are just there to draw off the infantry so the colonel can press his attack.” The captain replied.
“I am just making sure that we are clear on that point.” The major said.
“Yes sir, anything else?” the captain responded.
“Good luck, Captain.” The major said, he gave the captain a sharp salute, turned around and started back to his tent. The captain got back on his horse and looked back at Sergeant Devereaux. He then looked toward the sky briefly before he looked back at the sergeant again.
 “Let’s get them started Sergeant Devereaux.” Captain Brogan said and spurred his horse forward.
 “Yes, Sir.” Sergeant Devereaux responded to the captain. “Troop, Forward. Column of twos from the right.” The sergeant bellowed at the formation. The formation fell in behind Captain Brogan and his first sergeant and the formation rode out of the camp their exit crowned with the first magentas in the dawn sky. They rode along in silence that was broken only by the whinny of a horse.

The two mounted companies came out onto a meadow from a wooded path. The captain raised his hand signaling the formation to stop. His movement was echoed down the formation by the platoon commanders. The sun could be seen shining on the tops of the taller trees in the woods behind them and painted the clouds to the west with its light. Captain Brogan looked around for a spot to leave the horses. A thick dew had fallen during their ride and had settled on everyone in the host.  Captain Brogan signaled for Sergeant Devereaux who cantered up and stopped by the captain’s side.
“We’ll dismount here and enter the woods over there.” The captain said in a tone of voice just above a whisper. “Have the men dismount and spread out along the tree line from here on up the hill. Make sure the platoon leaders are clear on the plan we went over yesterday” the captain continued and pointed to the places he was referencing to the sergeant. “Leave a small sentry for the horses, and make sure the men know to bring all their ball and powder with them.” The sergeant nodded eagerly and rode back to the formation relaying the instructions to each of the platoon leaders. The captain stayed mounted on his horse and watched as the men executed his instruction. He dismounted when he was satisfied that his instructions had given were completed.
Sergeant Devereaux walked quickly from his mount to catch up with the captain. The two men started into the wood followed by the rest of the soldiers. The lack of direct sunlight left the interior of the woods dark, but it was made easier by the light of the meadow on the other side of the shallow stand of trees. It was at the wood line of the trees that the captain’s formation stopped and waited for the captain’s signal to move. On the other side of the meadow was a hill. On the hill were Union soldiers. The captain retrieved his field glasses to get a closer look. After he lifted them to his face and adjusted them for distance, he saw soldier’s that appeared to be just starting their morning. Many of the soldiers were not even in their full uniforms and huddled around campfires waiting for their first cup of coffee. He shifted his focus and saw the tents and campfires further up the hill, and shifted his focus again and saw the meadow with tall grass that stood between his men and the Union soldiers.
 “Sergeant Devereaux, have the men spread out along the wood line no less than six feet apart. I want company B to my left and A company to my right with muskets at the ready.” Captain Brogan said barely loud enough to be heard.
 “Yes, sir.” The sergeant replied and started to turn to leave. The captain grabbed the sergeant by the arm before he was able to move off.
 “And sergeant, round up Private Greene and bring him back here with you.” The captain said turning to look at the sergeant to indicate that this last statement was a request more than an order.
 “Yes, sir.” The sergeant replied and ran off to perform the captain’s orders.
The captain turned back around and went back to observing the enemy. His concentration is broken by the noisy return of Sergeant Devereaux with Private Greene. He turned around and signaled the sergeant to approach quieter. They responded by taking slower, more deliberate, steps.
“Captain, you didn’t tell me he had such big feet.” The sergeant said after reaching the captain location.
“Sorry Frenchy, I told him I’d keep him close during today’s action.”
“Sorry, sirs.” Private Greene said sheepishly. “Sir, I appreciate you keeping your word to me. I’ll try not to be too much trouble.
 “You’ll be fine. Just stick close.” The captain said absentmindedly as he looked through his field glasses.
“Yes, sir.”
“Hum, anything going on out there captain?” The sergeant asked squinting to view the hill opposite them. 
“It’s quiet. There just making breakfast. I haven’t been able to spot any sentries. You take a look, maybe you can spot them.”
Captain Brogan handed the sergeant his field glasses. The sergeant took them and surveys the hill opposite them.
“Do you see what I saw?” the captain asked.
“I’m not sure what you were looking at captain,” Sergeant Devereaux responded as he scanned the opposite hill.
“Well, those are either the dirtiest Yankees I’ve ever seen or they’re darkies,” the captain replied as the sergeant scanned the hill opposite with the field glasses. “I heard the Yankee’s were recruiting darkies but I didn’t think I’d ever see any in uniform.” The captain said as he reached for the field glasses to take another look.
“They’re too far away to be sure, captain.” The sergeant responded as he handed the field glasses back. “But them Yankee’s have become crafty after all the lickings we gave them.” The sergeant continued as he scratched himself nervously. “If they are darkies this is going to be easy, but don’t you think the colonel and his men would have mentioned that?”
The captain lowered his glasses and looked at the sergeant. “Good point.” He said and went back to looking through his glasses. “But if they’re white men why are they so dirty?”
“I didn’t see any sentries either. They’re just walking around out there like a bunch picnic ants.”
 “The colonel said they’ve been like this since his men first saw them. Maybe, they’re new.”
 “Captain, my daddy always told me the easiest catch is always hung on a hook.”
 “Do you think?”
*	*	*	*
Colonel Martel’s camp had a completely different atmosphere. Since the news spread that there was to be a raid and a cavalry charge, an energy, like static electricity, spread throughout the camp. Swords were sharpened, guns cleaned, and boots were polished like they were going to parade. The colonel neither encouraged nor discouraged this activity. Instead, he sat in his tent, sipping whiskey and gnawed on memories that were best forgotten. It wasn’t until well into the night that he gave the order for the camp to bed down for the night.
He was awakened later that night by a patrol that had brought in someone whom they thought was a deserter, but when the colonel saw him he realized that it was the young lieutenant from Owen’s regiment. He recognized the young officer immediately, but he did not share this with anyone in his command when they left the young officer in the colonel’s tent.
“I was bushwhacked.” Lieutenant Perry said as he sat in the chair opposite the colonel’s cot.
“What were you doing riding out afield at night son?” The colonel asked still groggy.
“I was taking a communiqué to headquarters for him when I was caught by some Yankee’s and held prisoner.” Lieutenant Perry said as he struggled with his bindings. “Can you untie me, sir?”
“In a moment Lieutenant, Please, finish your report first.”
“I was taken prisoner and riding on the back of one of their horses when one of the Yankee’s horses got spooked reared up and threw the both of us off. I rolled away into the woods, got up and started running. I guess they were too confused to take after me, but they got my message pouch. I was trying to get back to tell the major when your men came across me.”
“Do you know what was in the communiqué?”
“I’m not sure, because the major wouldn’t let me read it, but I believe it was a brief on the raid that you had planned with the major?”
“Why do you think that?”
“Because that’s what he was talking about during supper.”
“Was he?” the colonel said with a hint of haughtiness.
“Yes sir.”
“But you’re not sure.”
“No, sir.”
“Very well then son, thank you for your report.” The colonel said in a soft fatherly voice. “Sergeant Veemers,” the colonel barked.
“Yes, sir,” Sergeant Veemers replied and threw back the tent flap cover.
“Untie the lieutenant and make sure he has a mount for tomorrows attack.”
“Yes sir,” the sergeant replied and walked over to untie the lieutenant’s hands.
“What about the intercepted communiqué?” Lieutenant Perry turned to the colonel and asked before he exited the tent.
“I’m sure that the dispatch you were carrying did not contain anything pertinent to our attack. The major and I had an agreement.” The colonel said to the lieutenant who saluted before he exited the tent.
*	*	*	*
The charge started when the colonel’s horse started to move at a canter. The entire regiment could hear the crackle and feel the tingle of the raw energy. Then the colonel quickened the pace to a slow gallop, and the horse’s hooves sounded like the hundreds of heartbeats of the cavalrymen that rode all around. Then the slow gallop became a fast gallop and the sound of hooves changed from heartbeats to thunder. Finally, the colonel pulled his saber from its scabbard. You could see him yell charge, but you couldn’t hear him. The saber lifted high over his head flashed like lightening from the thundering cloud of soldiers. One felt compelled to yell, but the yell couldn’t be heard over the thunder of hooves. The only sense that one was yelling was the sensation of vibrating vocal chords. At full speed, the tears that issued from the colonel’s eye were swept away by the wind to water the lilies of glory. It was then that the charge became an unstoppable force, like the fall of a giant hammer; its blow capable of forcing even the hardest objects to yield to either bend or shatter.
In a single moment, the charge changed from the embodiment of God’s wrath back to human flesh when the Union soldiers released their first volley from the cannon hidden behind wooden barricades. The grape shot ripped through the formation mangling bodies and ripping through the flesh of both men and horses, but the charge did not stop. The second volley from the cannon did even greater damage to the men on horseback, but they still continued. The remaining horse soldiers laughed as the Yankee artilleryman scattered before them. Their horse leapt over the make shift barricade and bounded the dirt mound behind them only to find that it concealed a deep trench in which both horse and rider careened into followed by other unsuspecting riders. It was in this confusion that the Yankee’s appeared on the opposite side of the trench with their repeating rifles shooting at everything that moved. The Confederate soldiers in the trench, already shocked, stunned, or wounded, didn’t have a chance. The contents of trench soon became a twitching mass of both human and horse flesh. As movement in the trench became less frequent, the rifle fire of the Union soldiers slowed like a shower moved off to inundate some other place. 
*	*	*	*
From the other side of the hill was heard, first, a single rebel yell followed by a series of rebel yells and the thunder of horses hooves.
 “I guess we are about to find out.” Sergeant Devereaux said as all three men sprang to their feet and ran out of the woods into the meadow that separates the two hills. The rest of the company followed when they saw the captain and sergeant start off across the field. As the two companies of men ran across the field, it became obvious that the field was pitted with holes that were hidden by the tall grass. The captain and his men tripped and stumbled as they cross the field. Others looked down to avoid the holes.
The first Union gunfire didn’t start until the men were half way across the field and came from the tree line on the opposite hill. It was intermittent at first but quickly increased in intensity. It was from the new Union repeating rifles. Captain Brogan responded by trying to stop his men and get them to kneel down in the grass of the field, but by then there was too much noise for his orders to be heard and confusion, panic and tenacity had set in on the captain’s command. The Confederate soldiers moved forward even though they were being savagely cut down buy Union rifle fire. Some of the Confederate soldiers responded by pausing to take a shot with their muskets. The Union soldiers responded with more rifle fire, this time, from the tall grass to their right. Cannon fire began to erupt from the top of the hill from cannon hidden in the tents. The Confederate soldiers began to panic and started running in all directions in an effort to avoid the grape shot that cut swathes through their ranks. Captain Brogan stood up and tried to direct them back to the tree line where they started. He started to run in that direction. Short of the tree line, Captain Brogan was hit by divots thrown up by cannon shot and was knocked down. Sergeant Devereaux picked Brogan up and drug him to the safety of the tree line.  He smacked the stunned captain until he regained his senses. The captain came around just in time to see the sergeant in front of him fall over dead from a gunshot to the head. Captain Brogan tried to stand up but couldn’t. There was gun and cannon fire all around him. He pulled his field glasses from his pouch to survey the meadow. Captain Brogan’s men ran in all directions through the smoke and confusion looking for cover. They were being cut down by Union fire. He spotted Private Greene on his knees praying. The next moment there was an explosion and Private Greene was no more. A cannon shot exploded near the captain and all went black.
