Chapter 12 – The Ghost Returns
	The shadows from the fence posts of the fields John Brogan plowed grew noticeably longer. The field had not be turned in quite some time and proved to be difficult to plow. As he plowed it became obvious to him that parts of the field had never been properly plowed and the field had more than likely been pasture for grazing. He encountered rocks, the stumps of dead trees, and soil so full of clay it did not crumble as much as it cleaved. He had to stop frequently to rest himself and his horse.
	It was during one of these rest periods that his memory of the conversation that he had had with Cassie about the pistol, sword, and the promise he had made to their owner. It had been quite some time since he had really thought about the promise, being more caught up in getting married and fixing up their homestead. Cassie had a way of getting into a man’s head. Her stubbornness was both a blessing and a curse. Life was smooth sailing as long as you agreed with her, but for the person who disagreed with her she could be dogged. Not that she was irrational, but her persistence over an issue or a task took on a life of its own. Such was the situation with the colonel and his weapons. John Brogan rationalized their continued existence as a remembrance of an honorable man and his death due to another man’s treachery. Cassie saw them as a symbol of everything she hated about the war. He remembered several occasions when he brought the subject up with her and how she was not interested in discussing it, and now she wants these items to cast away to either rust or become the possessions of someone else. To do that to the colonel’s weapons after what the two men had been through he felt was unacceptable. John Brogan knew it was time to start back to work when he realized that his memeries had him talking out loud saying ‘no’ shaking his head no at the same time.
	The train of thoughts had followed him to his work behind the plow. The shadows of the fence posts started to take on the likeness of men as the day wore on and shadows grew longer. Maybe there was something similar between the smell of the earth that he plowed and the smell of the church the night he talked with the colonel, but, whatever it was, the colonel’s last words echoed in his head. The breathing of both he and his horse was labored. The sound of the plow as it cut through the ground beneath him, and the sound of the birds that were all around him disappeared and were replaced by the wheezy and weak voice of the colonel; the tone of voice, its anger, disgust, and subtle desperation flooded his memory as he told him about how and by whom had betrayed them. It gained so much control over his thoughts that he forgot what he was doing and didn’t stop at the end of the row. He walked into the plow because the horse had the sense to stop. It wasn’t until then he realized how exhausted he was that he again stopped to rest.
	The afternoon sun had touched to top of the trees when John Brogan made it to the fence that he used as a temporary seat on which to rest. The horse that was not far away glistened with perspiration. He realized that he usually didn’t work his animals this hard and realize that his thought was one of the feelings that he and Cassie shared: empathy. His thought opened the door to his memories of the two of them working together helping the wounded, running from one injured man to another, and how sometimes they would decide together to leave a particularly compelling case alone to die, but his thoughts drug him back, too far back, into the past. The image of Private Greene came to mind. He remembered how the private ran around in the field confused, afraid for his life, with gunfire and grapeshot flying all around him. He remembered the feeling of weakness in his legs and the feeling of excruciating helplessness as he saw Private Greene fall to his knees before he died and not being able to help. He thought about Private Greene’s fear and how much it must have been like the fear of all his other men who were cut to pieces experienced that day in the field. At that moment, John Brogan realized that he was crying. He also realized it was too late in the day to do anymore and got ready to go home where Cassie was waiting and probably wondering what was keeping him.

The light of the sunset faded into blues in violets throughout most the interior of the farmhouse. Kerosene lamps were lit in the parlor to illuminate the piano that Cassie played. She would stop intermittently to listen for her husband and then continue to keep herself from worrying. It wasn’t until the blanket of star covered half the sky did she hear the stirrings of John Brogan as he put the horse in the barn. Cassie went back to playing waiting for him to step through the door.
Cassie stopped playing the piano when John Brogan walked in. He was dirty from working in the fields but it did not stop her from getting up and wrapping her arms around him.
“You must be exhausted. I thought you’d be back earlier than this. I made a stew. Are you hungry?” she asked. John Brogan nodded. “Have a seat and I’ll fix you a bowl.”
John Brogan walked from the parlor and into the kitchen. He sat down at the kitchen table while Cassie went about fixing a bowl of stew. While she did that he washed his hands and face. When he finished washing up he sat down at the kitchen table. She put the bowl down in front of him and he began to eat.
“Is everything okay?” Cassie asked as she sat down across from him.
John Brogan stopped eating to speak. “It’s back.” John Brogan said.
“What’s back?”
“The memories, the war, the fighting.” 
“Oh, honey. I hope what I said didn’t dredge all this back up. We were doing so well.”
“It’s not you. It’s me. I can’t let go and I know I should.”
“Why don’t you. Tell me where that gun and sword are, and I will take them out and bury them or throw them in the creek never to be seen again.”
“I want to, but I can’t.”
“Why not!”
“Because I made a promise.”
“To a dead man?”
“To a dying man. A dying man who felt the need to share his last words with me.”
“But John, you don’t even know if he knew what he was saying, or what he was saying was the truth.”
“Colonel Martel was man of honor. He wouldn’t knowingly tell a lie. We were betrayed and that betrayal must be paid for.”
“But why you?”
“I’ve said enough. Let’s just leave it alone. I just can’t let go, not yet.” John Brogan said and went back to eating his stew. Cassie watched him in silence. She studied his face as he ate. After a while, she got up, went back to the piano, and began playing a Chopin nocturne.
John Brogan finished his stew and walked into the parlor where Cassie was playing the piano. She stopped playing when he walked up behind her and hugged her from behind.
“It’s not easy anymore. Before, I know who the enemy was and where they were. Now, sometimes, I feel that the enemy is me.” John Brogan said. He released his embrace and sat on a chair in the parlor. She continued playing until he fell asleep.

John Brogan pulled up in front of the town’s general store on his buckboard. He was tethering his horse when the quiet was broken by the approach of a column of Cavalry soldiers. At the end of the formation was a cannon. John Brogan remained disturbed after the formation passed. Peter, one of the store attendants, stepped out to help John Brogan.
“Are you all right Mr. Brogan?” Peter said. John Brogan, leaning against the seat of the buckboard, turned and looked at Peter.
“Greene?” Brogan asked.
“No, it’s Peter. Are you okay Mr. Brogan?” Peter replied.
“Peter, yes. Peter, yes I am fine. I just need to sit a minute.” John Brogan said and stumbled toward the steps of the General Store.
“Are you sure?” Peter asked.
“Yes, Peter I’m fine. Just let me sit here a minute. I guess I am a little more tired from planting than I thought.” Brogan said and sat down on the steps to rest.
“Did you see the cavalry come through?” Peter asked. John Brogan looked up at Peter. He still seemed a little weak.
“Yes, I did.” John Brogan said.
“We heard they were coming through looking for Confederate sympathizers and renegades. I heard that there were still bunches of them still riding around these parts.”
“I thought that they would all be done with that. The war has been over for two years.”
“Do you know about any of them Mr. Brogan? I mean, you being ex Confederate and all.”
“That part of the war is over for me.”
“Really? After all the fighting and dying people have done? They just go home like the end of a harvest?”
“Most do. The ones that weren’t hurt.”
“You mean like shot or lost a leg or an arm?”
“Yeah, something like that.”
“Gee, you think if it was that easy why did they do all that fighting for?”
“Because they said they would.”
“Huh?” 
“Someday you’ll understand.”
“I don’t think I’ll ever understand that.” Peter said.
John Brogan stood up refreshed. “Come on give me a hand, Peter, I’ve got some seed to load.” He said to Peter and the two walked into the general store.

	Captain Walter Noonan lifted his arm to signal his command to stop. Before him was an abandon farm. He found it particularly appealing for several reasons. It was on relatively high ground. It was close to an apparently continuous supply of fresh water, and it was situated on a quiet section of road that was not far from town. He waited patiently for the scout he sent out to reconnoiter the perimeter to return. The scout nodded at the captain when he returned. It was the news he expected. He turned to his first sergeant who waited on his horse not far behind the captain.
	“Sergeant Lucerne!” The captain barked.
	“Yes sir.”
	“Have the men set up camp here.”
	“Yes sir.”
	“We’ll probably be here a while. I want my tent pitched, sentries posted, and a sanitation ditch dug. And I want all of this done well before sundown.”
	“Yes sir!”
	The sergeant moved off to execute the captain’s commands. He could be heard in the background yelling commands and instructions. In turn, soldiers could be seen dismounting and moving into the open field trampling the spring grass and flowers. The captain spurred his horse forward and rode to the top of the hill they were on. He dismounted, pulled his field glasses from their case, and surveyed the view that he had of the surrounding area. As far as he could see there were plowed fields, prairie, or farmhouses. There was no sign of the guerilla style camp that he was hoping to see. He put his glasses away and rode back down to the bivouac that he had ordered constructed.

	Captain Noonan sat a table in his tent shaving with a straight razor when his orderly stepped in to announce the arrival of a visitor.
	“Mister Simpson to see you sir.” The orderly said.
	“Send him right in.” he replied as he continued shaving cleaning his razor in the bowl of water that sat next to him.
	Billy Simpson stepped into the captain’s tent and sneered at the sight of the captain shaving. The captain saw his expression in the mirror that he had set before him.
	“Simpson, pull up a seat. I was wondering when you and your people would catch up to us.” The captain said as he shaved the area beneath his chin.
	“My men and I try to keep a lower profile than your cavalry. You never know what you might spot if you follow behind far enough for your dust to settle.” Billy Simpson said pulling up a chair close to the captain. The captain put his razor down, wiped his face with a towel and turned to face his guest.
	“My regiment and I are here to support you and your efforts to capture the renegade Captain Byrne. From our conversation with the governor I understand how imperative his capture is, but I have also done my share of occupation duty. I understand that it is the locals that know what goes on under every rock and behind each tree. I have no desire to alienate them.” The captain said in a light but resolute tone.
	“Why are you telling me this?” Billy Simpson asked.
	“Because, I have read the reports and newspapers articles about how you and your men operate. This is Missouri and we are not an occupation force.” The captain replied in a more serious tone. Billy Simpson’s eye twitched as he absorbed what he was being told.
	“Yeah, well, don’t believe everything you read. What happened in those stories has two sides and you only read one.” Billy Simpson said in matter of fact tone.
	“Okay, I just wanted be sure that we were clear about how this operation was going to move forward.” The captain stopped to pour a glass of water and drank it. Billy Simpson looked on staring blankly at him. “We are looking for a bunch of drifters. I prefer that we keep it friendly with the locals until we are sure that their sympathies are elsewhere. Even then, I think we should take it on a case by case basis. We are here for a specific reason. Let’s not let the process get in the way of the goal.” Captain Noonan said staring at Billy Simpson. Simpson did not blink, but the captain did. “Have you and your men had breakfast?” The captain asked. Billy Simpson shook his head no. “Are you going to eat here or in town?”
	“I thought I would share your words with my men and start with our activities. I like to enter the hive just after it’s been disturbed. This is a small town captain. These people will still be talking about your arrival and I would like to hear what they have to say.” Simpson said. He picked up his hat, stood up and turned to leave.
	“And Simpson,” the captain said. “Stay in touch.” 
Billy Simpson put his hat on and walked out of the tent shaking his head and muttering quietly to himself. The captain turned back around and went back to shaving.

	Billy Simpson rode up to a small group of men gathered at the top of the hill close to the spot where Captain Noonan stopped. Although these men were dressed as civilians they were clearly not farmers. None of them had the relaxed unassuming posture of a farmer, and some of them had the age lines of well-worn dark expressions. The day was dark and cloudy. A gentle mist fell. It was just enough to cloud glasses and fog the view of the surrounding countryside. The horses that Simpson and his men rode, built for both speed and strength, had a statuesque appearance. Such animals were proud and restless but were also disciplined. They huddled together in a semi-circle with Simpson in the middle.
	“What did he have to say?” Watkins asked.
	“You know, the typical army type. He tried to lay down his law, but he hasn’t been out here chasing that bastard for as long as we have. We all know he’s got to be hiding out somewhere down here and the local have to be helping.” Simpson said to the nods and grunts of agreement from the others. “The new captain is not going to be much help to us, at least now. We’ll see how he feels after we expose a couple of locals. We go with our regular plan. We filter into town and place ourselves in the typical places. The hotel, general store, the livery stable and what have you. We meet by that covered bridge if we have news.”
	“What about the new captain.”
	“What about him? Is he one of us? Has he been out here for all these years? No, he’s just another governor appointee reaching for that gold star. You let me handle him. Now let’s get to it.” Simpson said and the group of men broke up and rode in different directions. Simpson did not leave right away but instead watched his men ride off. He then slowly rode back in the direction he came. In spots, the road was covered by trees. From behind one of the trees was where Sergeant Pinket was waited. He came out onto the road when he saw it was Simpson.
	“You still with us?” Simpson asked the mounted soldier.
	“You still pay in gold?” Sergeant Pinket replied and Billy Simpson nodded his head.
	“What about your captain? I think he might be on to us.”
	“You let me handle him. If he becomes too much trouble we might have to do something with him, but of course that would be extra.”
	“Of course.” Billy Simpson nodded before he galloped off down the road.

