Chapter 5 – Cassie’s Lost Cause
	Cassie, having never walked beyond the boundaries of 20 Elms, never really noticed how rough the terrain was around her home. The last league to her home seemed an eternity made worse by the recent loss of Rene. Tears mixed with sweat rolled down her face and into the scratches and scrapes she encountered as she walked through the bramble and brush of her home county. Her clothes fared no better; like her, they too were dirty and had been pulled, torn, and stretched in all directions. She had taken on the appearance of a war refugee and no longer subject to curious glances from passersby. She had become one with the landscape and moved with the ease of a fallen leaf through a forest.
	As evening fell, her thoughts were a debate over the issue of whether to keep moving and reach home in the dark or stop and find refuge and reach home in the light of day. She felt so tired that if she were to fall asleep in some shelter that she would sleep for ever. It became an enticing thought. The only thing that kept her moving was the idea of reaching home, sleeping in a bed with clean sheets, a pillow, and the safety of being home not having to stir at every little sound. The debate raged in her mind as she kept moving. Every step she made that brought her closer to home was another reason not to stop until she reached it.
	She found other reasons to keep moving as she continued walking. Every so often, like smelling salts, she would come across a small plot of graves of war dead, or she would encounter the decomposing or decomposed corpse of a man, horse, or mule. Each time, she was reminded that home was the only truly safe place to rest. The forest stank of the conflict that surrounded her and everyone else in the county. The lingering stench of death was enough to give her the strength to keep putting one foot in front of the other until she reached the long drive that lead up to the manor house at Twenty Elms. 

	Full darkness had descended around Cassie on a moonless night. It gave her the confidence to walk the road knowing that no one could approach her without her noticing them first. The silhouette from the side of the road was that of trees and bushes against a starry sky. It was darkness against an even greater darkness. Her eyelids felt as though they were being drawn together by an ever strengthening magnetism, but there was no stopping now. It was too dark to just stop and fall asleep beneath a tree and the sting of the scratches and scrapes that pinched at her helped keep her awake.
	The numbness of fatigue set in until she felt a familiar roughness of brick that her senses full returned to her. She felt as though an electric current flowed through her body and reached out with both hands to touch the bricks in the wall. She strained her eyes to validate what she thought she was feeling, the bricks of the wall at Twenty Elms. Darkness confounded her, but her energy returned. She groped along the length wall snagged, from time to time, by a seemingly familiar bush that helped to validate her belief that she was where she thought she was. After stumbling several times in blind haste, she finally came to the large wrought iron gate that told her she was home. An unexpected sob of joy and relief briefly overcame her before she felt her way around the gate, that she realized no longer sat on its hinges. Finding the gate’s end, she walked around it and started down the drive to the manor house. Exhaustion prevented her from running, but desire made her feel as though she were flying. She cleared the crest of the first hill and came round the corner with full expectation to see the lights on in the manor house, but when she rounded the corner she was greeted by a completely unexpected sight. All that remained of the manor house were its two chimneys and even they leaned to one side in a state of precarious ruin. First she gasped, then she was overcome with the urge to cry, and finally the weight of her exhaustion settled on her and she fainted. She lay there for some time while her body and mind recovered from the shock of her loss and effort of the journey.

	She awoke swatting at what she thought was a bug on her cheek. She was wrong. It was the cold steel of a gun barrel being cavalierly run across her face. She was still quite tired and it took a moment for the nature of her situation to fully register, but when it did, she went from sleep exhaustion to being fully alert. Her muscles tensed, and she twitched involuntarily suppressing the urge to run. She gathered her wits and the face of her captor came into focus. He was a large, rotund man with a ruddy complexion. He wore what she thought was a Confederate uniform that was filthy with an even dirtier dandy hat that had a large dark feather in it. His smile exposed rotting yellow-brown teeth stained with chewing tobacco that, even then, he chewed on. Cassie closed her eyes to focus her thoughts on escape.
	“Get up, no playing possum,” the man said as he slowly backed away from her to allow her to stand. Cassie opened her eyes and slowly stood up. Her muscles ached and were slow to respond. Loose dirt and leaves fell away as she stood. The captor looked her over once she was on her feet. “Looks like you seen some hard times lately,” he said making sure that he kept a good distance away from her. “Are you a refuge? They burn your home?” he asked.
	Cassie raised her downcast eyes up toward the tree line. “No.”
	“Then what are you doing out here sleeping in the dirt wearing tattered clothes?”
	“I . . . I . . .I am here visiting.” She said looking the man in the eye as if she were challenging him not to believe her.
	“Visiting? Visiting who? There ain’t nothing out here but weeds and destruction. Look around you woman. If you are going to lie you need to have a better one than that.” He said backing away from Cassie another step. “You need to tell me something that will stop me from shooting you and leaving you for the crows.” 
	“I can only tell you the truth.”
	“Well, I don’t believe you and I don’t like being seen by strangers.” He paused and looked her over again. “Sheriff send you out here?”
	“No.” She said realizing that he was more frightened than she. “Why do you have to keep pointing that gun at me?”
	“It’s the times. Men who aren’t careful these days tend to catch a death of dead.”
	“You sound like you’re from these parts?”
	“I told you. I am here visiting. I came from Paris.”
	“Paris?” The man broke into a full bodied hoarse laugh. Cassie considered charging him and seizing his gun, but she thought better of it for fear that she’d lose if there were a struggle. She watched him as he continued to laugh still unsure whether she should accost him or run. Someone else provided an answer for her. A shot from a heavy rifle rang out and the man’s body jerked violently forward before it fell to the ground. He was dead. Blood and tobacco blackened saliva issued from his mouth. Cassie gasped in horror, put her hands over her mouth, and began to hyper ventilate. She thought that she might be next. She heard the sound of horses galloping toward her, but she was in too much shock to pay any real attention to her.
	It wasn’t until the horsemen were right up on her that she was able to catch her breath and regain her composure. In front of her were four men on horseback that were circling the dead man as though he were the quarry of a hunt.
	“Corporal Pummet.” One of the men said as his horse hesitated going to close to the body.
	“Let me see,” said one of the horsemen who got off his horse, approached the body and turned it over. “My daddy’s captured revolver,” the young man said as he pulled the gun from the dead man’s hand and spit in his face with malice.
	“Whoa, Lee. There’s a woman present.” One of the mounted rider said and looked down to smile at her.
	“Sorry, Ma’am.” The young man said standing up and sticking the revolver he took from the dead man in the waist of his pants. “This man here is a thief, coward, and deserter. Who knows what he would have done if we had not of come upon y’all.”
	“I do appreciate your assistance, but could you not have wounded and restrained him.” Cassie said.
	“He was a mad dog run amok. We did what had to be done ma’am. If you had known what he had done I believe you would have been more sympathetic to our actions.” The young man said and turned to mount his horse.
	“And what about you ma’am? How do you come to be out here so early and in such condition?”
	“I was coming home to see my family,” Cassie said remembering what she had seen last night and trying hard to suppress the tearful sob that welled up inside. “This used to be my home.”	
	“You’re Randolph’s sister? He said that you were someplace safe from this? Why would you come back knowing what had happened here?”
	“I didn’t know what had happened.” Cassie replied as she ran her hand through her hair in frustration to clear the dirt and leaves from the previous night. She sighed, looked back at what was left of the manor house and shook her head.
	“We’d rather not leave you out here alone ma’am,” said the horseman who was closest to here. “He’s not the only one of his kind roaming around out here. Let us give you a ride into town.”
	“Certainly,” she said and approached the horseman who had his arm extended to help her up on his horse. With one quick jerk she was on the horse with her hands on the waist of stranger. He urged the horse forward and the four men headed off toward the long besieged town of Corinth. Along the way, Cassie’s thoughts became a cacophony of confusion. Her intended purpose of going home to her family appeared to her as ashes. Her life in Paris, with the death of Rene, seemed like a childhood fantasy. Her return to such a life would make her seem, in her own mind, shallow and selfish, and there were recriminations for her not thinking how bad things could have gotten for the South and her family. All of these thoughts added up to one overriding question in her mind: what do I do now? As far as she was concerned, she might as well have been shipwrecked. In one moment, her life had lost all direction and its purpose.

	The horseman had dropped her off at Cumberland Presbyterian Church. Its pastor, the Reverend Ezekiel Williams was a man with a face carved by lines from often used stern expressions. The lines presented themselves like tooled leather. They were worn and unyielding, but the sight of Cassie brought a seldom seen light of compassion to his eyes. He even sent for his wife and had her sit with Cassie in his office as he pondered how he could help the young woman that sat before him. Cassie’s expression of despair was one that he had seen many times before, but it was the depth of the disillusionment that touched him. He had trouble fathoming how anyone could be caught so off guard. He stood up from his desk and walked out of his office gesturing to his wife to follow. He stopped just outside and turned to his wife, Diana, in the hallway that led from his office to the pulpit.
	“I think it would be best if you talk to her first,” he said in a resonant whisper. The lines of his face masked the concern that showed in his eyes. His wife nodded in agreement. “Wait a while before you ask her anything. Let her get used to your presence. I doubt she’s thinking clearly and she might not be able to say what is really on her mind. But she should not be left alone right now.” Diane reached up and gently squeezed Ezekiel’s wrist before she turned and walked back into her husband’s office. She sat down in a chair near Cassie, gave her a warm smile, and started back at her needlepoint. Cassie stared blankly into space. As time passed, intermittently, a tear would roll down her face when she blinked. After an hour or so, Cassie was slumped over in her chair asleep. The reverend had some deacon’s lay some blankets down on a pew and had her carried from his office to her makeshift bed where she slept for the rest of the day into the next morning.
	Cassie drifted back into consciousness with the sensation of her face being gently caressed by coarse yet womanly fingers. Her eyes focused on her mother sitting on a chair beside where she slept. She tried to get up, but her mother’s firm hand restrained her.
	“Rest, my dear, I’ll be right here next to you. They told me how they found you,” her mother said and smiled at her daughter. At first there were tears that were followed by her having a long sobbing cry. Cassie’s mother held Cassie to her breast and hummed a hymn while at the same time shushing her. Cassie’s crying worked like a steam valve that gradually released the emotions that overwhelmed her. There was a long silence after Cassie had finished crying. The two women held each other as though they had been grafted together. The mother gently pushed Cassie away to look at her.
	“Why did you come back?” The mother asked with her hands on her daughter’s shoulders. The shadow of recent memories crossed Cassie’s face before she took a deep breath and said, “I had to.” A tide of consternation washed across her mother’s face mixed with flashes of shock and anger. “I would have sung for the devil to keep you away.” Her mother said regaining her composure.
 	“I know,” Cassie replied at a whisper. “It was your letters that made me suspicious,” she added speaking up. “How could I believe what you were telling me when the newspapers, the pictures and lecturers contradicted you?”
	“You should have stayed in Paris where it was safe. Didn’t you think to turn back on your journey here?
	“I thought about it yes, but I had to know that you were all safe and well. If you wouldn’t tell me in your letters I had to see for myself.”
	“We were trying to protect you from what had happened.”
	“But not the doubt and worry of not knowing,” Cassie replied as if by reflex. “I never in my wildest dreams thought what happened could happen to us.”
	“But it has.”
	“And my brothers and father, what has happened to them?”
	“Your father has been missing since Chancellorsville, and your brothers are home, wounded by the war. You might not want to see them.”
	“Is it that bad?”
	“We lost everything in the fighting during the siege. Your father placed his entire faith and fortune in the Confederacy.” Her mother said with her tone becoming more acid as she continued. “We now use Confederate script as kindling for our fires.” Her mother paused to let her words sink in. “And stay here in town, living off of the charity of others.” The two women sat not speaking for a while.
	“If I had ever thought the world could get turned this upside down, I would have got off while I was still happy.”
	“Mother no!” Cassie said shocked and horrified.
	“You have no idea what I have been through. My only hope was to keep you away from this, but now, here you are.”
	“I didn’t mean for this to hurt you. I was just worried.”
	“I know, I know, no one meant for any of this to happen. The war was supposed to last a few weeks or a couple of months at most. We were supposed to whip the Yankee’s and they were supposed to sue for peace and we could go on living like we were, but none of that happened. There was just war and more war. We knew about the fire that came with war, but no one ever mentioned that rot that lingers long after the fire goes out.”
	“Oh momma, I never meant to hurt you.”
	“I know my dear; it’s probably just the Lord’s way of punishing me for lying.” She replied and embraced her daughter. “I have to go now and tend to your brothers. I’ve been away from them too long. I’ll come back for you later.” She said and pulled away from Cassie, stood up and walked out of the church. Daylight briefly engulfed the interior of the church when her mother opened the door to leave. Cassie lay back down and went back to sleep.

	Cassie, after being rested, bathed, fed, and given fresh clothing, could not help but think what was in her head to want to come to such a place as she walked through the streets of Corinth with her mother. She was also anxious about seeing her brothers. She now realized that nothing could have adequately prepared her to see the fate of her family and home, and that the pictures and lectures that haunted her in Paris was only a mild tickle in comparison to the pain experienced when exposed to the reality. Between the smells of Corinth that pinched her nose she could smell the coffee from the Parisian cafés and the comparatively sweet smell of the River Seine.
	Her mother walked down an alley between two stores and up the stairs to a door on the second floor of one of the stores. The store itself had seen better days, the stairs were creaky and the wood planks of the building’s siding weather worn. At the top of the stairs, after clearing a missing step was a door that her mother unlocked and stepped through. Cassie followed her mother into a dark and musky room. Total darkness encompassed the room when her mother closed the door behind her daughter and groped her way across the room to another door. She opened it and the light of a single lantern lit both rooms. 
Her mother looked back at her impatiently. “Come on.” She said to Cassie and disappeared into the room. Cassie cautiously followed her mother to the door. She gasped when she reached the doorway and could see inside the room. Her brother was draped across the bed, coated in sweat, wearing a dingy tee shirt and boxer shorts both of cotton, sleeping off a drunk. The room smelled of stale liquor, urine, and body odor. She slowly looked further into the room searching for her mother. She saw her leaned over whispering to a man, who stared out of a dirty window, seated in a wicker chair fitted with wheels. Cassie slowly stepped into the room, around her sleeping brother, and walked toward her mother. Her mother stepped back away from where she was. The man in the chair wheeled around in a single movement. Cassie gasped at the speed with which the man moved, and she was caught off guard by what she saw. It was her brother Randolph. He had lost both of his legs and had a mask over the right half of his face that concealed its deformity. He had grown his hair long so it hid part of the mask and some of the left side of his face.
	“Hello Cassie,” Randolph said as he wheeled the chair closer to her. It was obvious by his greeting that his wound impeded his ability to speak. When he was close enough, Randolph extended his hand for her to shake. Cassie instinctively jerked her body back. “It’s me, Randy. Don’t be afraid,” he said as best he could but sounded as though he only could use half of his tongue and lips. Cassie smiled and stepped forward to shake her brother’s hand, and, as an afterthought, leaned fully forward and hugged what was left of her brother. She held him so close that he had to push her away momentarily. “Not so hard,” he said and Cassie relaxed her embrace and continued her hug this time with more care. 
	“You need to let go Cassie, he’s still fragile,” her mother said. Cassie’s cheeks were moist when she stood up after the hug. She wiped them with the ball of her palm.
	“What have they done to you?” Cassie asked looking her brother Randy over. “Are you still in pain?”
	“He’s always in pain.” The mother answered. Doctor Floyd makes sure that he has plenty of cough Syrup. It dulls the pain and helps him sleep at night.”
	“I don’t need it all the time,” Randy interjected. “It’s just that sometimes I can still feel my legs even though they aren’t there anymore.”
	“Don’t believe him. He has nightmares too. He needs his syrup every day even though he tries to skip some. He’s just like his father, so stubborn until he’s foolish. When will men learn that’s why God put women on earth, to care for stubborn fools like him.”
	“Oh momma, you know Randy has always been difficult about taking medicine,” Cassie said smiling looking down at Randolph.
	“He needs to listen to me when I am taking care of him. I can’t be spending my entire day coaxing him to do something that he needs to do.”
	“Randy, you need to listen to mamma when she’s taking care of you. You’re grown now.”
	“Momma tells me you came all the way back from Paris to see us? Is that true? Are you going to stay? Or did you come to fight Yankees like I’ve been telling momma you would all this time?” Randolph said visibly exhausted by his effort.
	“I don’t know what I’m going to do,” Cassie replied sheepishly her eyes searched the room looking for a comfortable place to focus.
	“Your sister has to go now so you can get your rest now. You were up half the night tossing and turning with your dreams.” Cassie’s mother said as she walked across the room and grabbed her daughter’s hand to lead her out of the room. Cassie looked back at her brother to smile at him one last time before her mother’s grip pulled her out of the room into the darkness of the outer room. Cassie’s mother closed the door behind her and leaned against it.
	“War,” she said to Cassie under her breath. “As good as it is to see you, you should never have come back.”
	“I know momma, but I was worried. Your letters didn’t help. I had no idea of what was going on. They caused me to have great concerns.”
	“I now know that. I thought that by sending you the letters you would know that we were still alive and that would be enough for you. I didn’t think you would be able to sense our despair in the letters.” She said and looked down at her feet lost in thought. “In some ways, many ways, I am very proud of you. I read your letters many times thinking of the good time you were having and prayed that you would stay where you were. Seeing you seeing us like this makes me want to beat you like a field hand, but the joy, and hope you have brought prevents me.” She said looking up and staring into her daughter’s eyes. “Now that you are here, and know the suffering you can either go back to Paris, which I doubt you’ll do knowing you, or you can roll up your sleeves and help the cause.” 
	“Momma, you know I would never . . .”
	“Hush now, you know your brothers are my responsibility, but you are still young and there are others who have no mother or sister to hold their hand or wipe their brow in the darkness night. You need to think about them and leave your brothers to me. They are all I have now, and they are really the only thing that keeps me on this earth.” She added interrupting Cassie with tears forming up in her eyes as she spoke. Cassie took a moment to absorb what her mother said. She punctuated her thoughts were with a deep sigh and a smile.
	“Take care of my brothers,” Cassie said and gave her mother a long tight embrace. When the embrace ended, Cassie turned and walked back down the stairs without ever looking back at her mother who quietly reentered her room and closed the door.
	Reverend Williams was still in his office when Cassie returned from meeting with her family. When he heard the front door of the church shut, he closed the book he was reading and walked from his office into the sanctuary. He expected to meet a defeated soul, but he found a young woman that had a sullen but determined look on her face. He was even more surprise, but somewhat relieved, when she asked for a ride back to Doctor Pratt’s. She watched him close the church and walked quietly behind him to his buckboard where he helped her up and they started on their way out of town. Cassie took one last look at the store where her mother’s room was when she passed it on her out of town. She had now started down a path that of life was life truly a path on her own.
