Chapter 17 – Bunkhouse Monk
	The ride out to the ranch took several hours over some rough country. The bottle of whiskey the two men shared earlier still sloshed around in Brogan’s head as he rode along behind Sundgren to the ranch. Where he rode now was all new country to him, but it did not stop him from being wary of what was behind the rocks and trees around them. Half of the ride was along the trail that the stagecoach traveled, and the other half was up an ever narrowing river valley. As they rode it seemed as though the walls of the valley were slow closing in on them. With the passing of the day, the sunlight hid behind the sides of the valley unless, as the river twisted and turned, they could see the sun directly ahead or behind them. The two men climbed the steep side of a hill and rode through a small pass. On the other side of the narrow pass was a wide flat valley that appeared as though one could see clear over to the other side of the earth. In the near distance, a couple of miles away, were ranch houses and corrals. After being on the farm and sleeping in bed for so long, the sight of a place to sleep that had a roof over it was a welcome. Sundgren was not much of a talker, and said little other than to give warnings about hazards along the way. John Brogan did not mind the silence, and for the first time since Cassie’s death he didn’t dwell on what had happened. It was as though the ride out and the view at the top of the pass was his ride out of the darkness of Cassie’s passing. At the far end of the valley the setting sun was just touching the tops of the trees.
	It was dusk when they arrived at the ranch. There was a ranch hand waiting to meet the two men and tend to their horses. Sundgren walked away from his horse and toward the ranch house as soon as he got off his horse. Along the way, he turned and told Brogan to wait for him where he was and that he’d return shortly. It was full dark when Sundgren returned. He was a silhouette against the light of the kerosene lamps that illuminated the rooms of the ranch house. He called out for Brogan as he approached, and when he finally reached him he handed Brogan a full flask a brandy.
	“Gets cold fast up here at night.” Sundgren said. “Come on, I’ll take you around to the bunk house and introduce you to the boys.” He added then turned and walked toward the bunkhouse at a brisk pace. Brogan now realized why Sundgren walked so fast. In such weather his pace made the trips between the buildings much shorter and kept the blood moving to keep the body warm. He followed suit. The bunkhouse was a long narrow building near one of the corrals. Brogan had mistaken it for a chicken coop when he first saw it at a distance. The wood of the structure was dried, knotted, and in some places warped. The door was held closed by a simple wooden latch that was splintered and looked ready to fall apart. It was dark inside when Sundgren opened the door.
	“Who’s in here? Why aren’t there any lamps lit?” He bellowed once inside. One of the ranch hands fell out of a top bunk surprised by the disturbance.
	“We’re trying to sleep Mister Sundgren.” The ranch hand replied. He was just getting to his feet after his fall. The blanket that he slept under was still on the floor.
	“Sleep? It’s too early to sleep. Where are the other hands, Goat?” Sundgren asked.
	“Some of them haven’t come in from the range yet Mister Sundgren.” Goat replied.
	“And the others?”
	“I’ll go see who’s around Mister Sundgren.” Goat said and scrambled passed the two men and out the door.
	“Do all your hands call you Mister Sundgren?” Brogan asked.
	“Just the chickens. Are you a chicken Brogan?”
	“No sir.” Brogan replied and thought about the impact his words had without seeing the face that heard them. Goat could be heard in the background yelling for the other ranch hands.
	“Well, we’ll see won’t we?” Sundgren said and walked further into the bunkhouse. “Come on Brogan. I think I can find a lamp somewhere in here.” Brogan followed the sound of Sundgren’s footsteps through the bunkhouse. The interior of the bunkhouse was a mix of offensive odors that were a stark contrast to the cold but fresh air outside. “See what I mean Brogan. It stinks in here. The live like chickens unable to clean up their own filth.”
	“You don’t expect me to. . .”
	“No, each man keeps his own, but maybe you can set an example for the others to live up to.” Sundgren said as he continued walking down what felt like an aisle between rows of bunks. Brogan could sense the proximity of the bunks. Finally, Brogan heard a loud metallic noise and the smell of kerosene which proved to be Sundgren knocking over a lamp. Sundgren swore and could be heard groping around on the table for matches after he set the lamp upright. Sundgren, finding the matches, could be heard fumbling with the matchbox that ended with him extracting a match and striking it against the wall. First there were sparks which were followed by the tiny explosion of the match head that illuminated the small area around the two men’s faces. He lit the lantern, and the room was aglow in a soft yellow light. The lines on the faces of the two men were highlighted in exaggerated relief. Sundgren’s face reminded Brogan of the rocky terrain that they rode over on the way to the ranch.
	“While we wait for Goat, I did want to talk to you in private.” Sundgren said. The motion of his speaking disturbed the analogy of the resemblance of his face to the land. “I got a real bad rustling problem. Real bad. I need someone like you to clean it up. You don’t need to kill or hurt any innocents, but if they’re out on my range and they are not me or one of the hands in here they’re a part of the problem. Can I count on you?” Sundgren said and gave Brogan a hard serious look. Brogan nodded his head. “There’ll be a bounty in it for you, but that’s just between me and you. And if any of these chickens give you trouble, you can handle it as you see fit.” The door burst open just as Sundgren finished making his offer. Goat had returned with a group of men. Sundgren turned and increased the intensity of the light from the lantern. Goat walked in ahead of the other men. In the light it became obvious how he got his name. He had a long face with short beard that grew from his chin. His receding hairline made it appear as though he had horns, and there was that look in his eye that was suggestive of a goat’s countenance.
	“Light some more lamps in here. This is no damn rabbit hole.” Sundgren complained. The men that just entered scrambled to light the lamps that hung from the ceiling in a row over the bunkhouse aisle. The detail of the faces of the men became visible as the lamps were lit. After all the lamps were lit, the men in the bunkhouse stood in two rows each one by a bunk. Sundgren walked down the row, turning left then right, pointing at the man as he introduced them.
	“Hey, you all, this here is Brogan. He’s the new ranch hand. Brogan this is Murray, Pinter, Snowden, Nelson, Frye, Nymander, and Jarrett. I believe that you have already met Goat.” Sundgren said standing by the door. “Jarrett here is kind of the lead hand and he’ll let you know how things work around here. Right Jarrett?”
	“Yes Mister Sundgren.” Jarrett replied appearing somewhat surprised by what Sundgren said. 
“I’m telling you so you can tell the others, Brogan is no chicken. He is here to do the work that you chickens either can’t or won’t do. So make sure he’s well outfitted and on the range no later than the day after tomorrow.” Sundgren said to Jarrett and then walked out of the bunkhouse slamming the door behind him without saying another word. Brogan stared blankly at Jarrett waiting for a response from him.
“You can take the bunk under mine.” Jarrett said. “I don’t know what Sundgren means about the work we don’t do. We do damn near everything around here except drink and eat for him. That he likes doing himself.” Jarrett added with the other ranch hands mumbling in agreement behind him. “What kind of work does he have you doing?”
“I won’t really know until we get out on his range.” Brogan replied. “I’m real tired. I think I’ll just climb in my bunk and sleep. We can talk tomorrow.” He added. Jarrett pointed at the bunk below his then turned and walked up the aisle toward the rest of the ranch hands. Brogan climbed in his bunk, kicked off his boots, unbuckled his gun belt, which he used as a pillow, and fell fast asleep.

It was still dark when Jarrett shook Brogan awake. It was dark in around his bunk with the only light in the bunkhouse being a single lantern that hung at the opposite end.
“Get up, get up Brogan. It’s time to get started.” Jarrett said as he backed away from Brogan in his bunk. “We’re going to get breakfast, get you outfitted and get out on Sundgren’s range. All this before sunup.” Jarrett watched Brogan roll out of bed. He was groggy and stiff. With his feet on the floor, Brogan took a moment to gather his wits.”Let’s go before all the food is gone.” Jarrett said and started for the door. Brogan looked around and noticed that the bunk house was empty except for the two of them. Realizing this, he jumped to his feet quickly and followed close on Jarrett’s heels as the two made their way to the ranch mess to eat.
In the stable, Brogan’s horse Tinker was ready to go. She had been fed, watered and rubbed down, all the things that she needed after their ride from St. Josephs. Jarrett handed Brogan a sheepskin coat, a pair of gloves, and some tools for mending fence. Seeing that they were properly outfitted, Jarrett spoke to Brogan for the first time since waking him. “Ready?” he asked. Brogan nodded in response. They mounted their horses and headed east by north for Brogan’s first time out on the range. The two rode over the frosty grass moving, for some time, as quickly as their horses would take them. Once out of sight of the ranch house, Brogan felt as though he had put his life in Jarrett’s hands, but it didn’t matter to him. He figured that it really wouldn’t matter what Jarrett did. As far as Brogan was concerned, he was driftwood, alone at the mercy of time and tide.
Brogan was a bit curious when Jarrett started up a canyon that had a creek that flowed out of it, but had his questions answered when he saw a small deserted cabin. The two men dismounted in front of the cabin; Jarrett started walking around looking at the ground. Jarrett picked up a tin can, it was then Brogan figured out the reason why they stopped.
“Recent.” Jarrett said as he dropped the empty can at his feet. “Sundgren told me that you are here because you’re a man hunter.” Brogan nodded his head. “Better you than me.” Jarrett said and continued searching the ground for other items. “These men don’t bother me none, and there hasn’t been any shooting, but I guess you’ll be changing all that.”
“They’re stealing his property.” Brogan replied indifferently. “He wants a message sent to these people, and if you all can’t do it. I can.” Brogan added then turned his back to Jarrett and walked into the cabin. The mid morning sun flooded the cabin with light when he opened the door and looked around inside. Jarrett was still in the same spot when Brogan stepped out after spending a good while inside.
“You ready?” Jarrett asked and walked back to his horse. Brogan didn’t answer him; he just followed. The two men got back on their horses, and Jarrett started riding away from the cabin headed west. Brogan rode around the cabin in a wide circle. He stopped at a spot north of the cabin and called out to Jarrett as Brogan pointed north. Jarrett rode over to where Brogan had stopped.
“They’re headed that way.” Brogan said. “Judging from these tracks I guess we’re the better part of a week behind them, but they don’t know we’re chasing them do they?”
“Are we?” Jarrett asked.
“Yes we are. They’ve got the cattle that we’re supposed to be tending, and I’ve got a message to give to them.” Brogan said giving Jarrett a stern look. Jarrett’s expression showed his displeasure. Brogan spurred his horse and rode off. Jarrett sat there a minute and then rode off behind Brogan.
The two men did not return to the bunk house that night. Instead, they holed up in one of the tiny cabins that were scattered across the range. The next morning they started as soon as there was enough light to follow the trail hoof prints left behind by the rustlers. Riding hard, the two men had caught up with the rustlers by that evening. Staying at a safe distance and bedding down for the night, Jarrett thought they would corner them the next morning, but he was surprised when he awoke during the night to the sound of gunfire and then silence. He figured that Brogan had been anxious and got what he was asking for. It was even more to his surprise when Brogan appeared with two gun belts hanging from his shoulder. He stoked the fire and shared a can of beans with Jarrett before they both bedded down for the rest of the night. They returned to the ranch the next day. On their return, Brogan headed straight for the ranch house where, much to Jarrett’s surprise, he was let in. Within minutes there could be heard the frequent and boisterous laugh of Sundgren from within confines of the ranch house. In the pit of his stomach, Jarrett could feel the toxic mix of envy and disgust.

Weeks passed. In that time, Brogan had made quite an impression on the ranch hands. By then, he had rode with most of the ranch hands each time bringing back more gun belts, always returning with at least two sometimes more. It grated on Jarrett’s nerves. Not just that his actions curried favor with the boss, but he felt that there was something wrong with a man who could kill another man with the same indifference of hunting vermin. Also, there were the stories from the other ranch hands about Brogan. And Brogan’s nightmares, his tossing and turning as though he danced with the devil himself. To Jarrett, it all added up to something bad. 

It was odd that Jarrett was in the ranch mess alone, but a bad throw from one of the broncos left him limping and sore. The echo of Pinter’s story remained in his head. It started with Brogan and Pinter scouring the range up by Blue Elk Creek where Brogan came across a large group of rustlers. He first discovered their tracks and followed them up into the canyon to its head waters. There he found the six of them unaware of his presence splashing in the cold water of the spring fed pond that fed the creek. It was a hot day. Brogan and Pinter watched them in their horseplay. Pinter then watched as Brogan moved up close with his repeater rifle. He watched Brogan climb a tree and pick them off one by one killing six with seven shots. There was no discussion, no warning, just bullets out of nowhere aimed with deadly intent. His marksmanship left Pinter in awe. So did how he was able to retrieve their gun belts like skins for a bounty. When Pinter asked him about burying the men, Brogan replied by telling him vultures have to eat too. The image of men being left out on the range like carcasses disturbed Jarrett. Even when Jarrett killed Indians, he figured their kin would come and claim the bodies.
Jarrett made it back to the bunkhouse and lay in his bunk just to have to hear another story about Brogan and his exploits. He had just finished the flask of whiskey that Sundgren had given him to help with the pain when Snowden and Nelson walked in talking to each other in loud voices. It was another story about catching rustler’s red handed. Brogan took one of them, tied him down and branded him. The two men laughed about how the man screamed and writhed in pain. They joked about the smell of the branding and how Brogan finally put him out of his misery. Between the pain, liquor, and macabre story Jarrett had had enough.
“SHUT UP, Shut UP with that!” He shouted as he lay in his bunk. “It’s not funny. None of its funny. How do you know he’s not planning to do the same thing to you some day?”
“Gosh Jarrett, what’s got into you?” Snowden asked no longer smiling.
“How can you go out on the range and fall asleep next to a man like that?” Jarrett asked.
“Cause he’s one of us.” Nelson said.
“Is he?”
“Aw come on Jarrett. He sleeps in the bunk under yours, you see him almost every day. You know he’s one of us.” Snowden said while Nelson nodded in agreement beside him. “Think about how good a mood Mister Sundgren’s been in since Brogan’s been around. He even comes down here to talk to us some times. He’s never done that before.”
Jarrett was in too much pain and couldn’t roll over in his bunk to look either one of them in the face like he wanted. He could only stare up at the ceiling searching for the words to make his case. “Did you ever think about doing the things he does to other men? Ever?”
“Well no, but.” The two men replied in unison hesitantly.
“But Mister Sundgren would never put up with him doing something like that to one of us.” Nelson said. “I don’t know what you’re sore about. He’s been there to help us all out when there’s been trouble. Even going and talking to Sundgren.”
“Still, if Brogan went loco and went after one of us what could Sundgren do about a man like that? What could any of us do?” Jarrett asked. Nelson and Snowden fell silent. Jarrett could only hear the scuffle of their boots and the slam of the bunk house door as the two men left. Jarrett welcomed the silence they left behind and was soon sound asleep.
In the bunkhouse, the group ranch hands were washing up preparing for their monthly trip into town.  Jarrett, recovered from his fall, finished washing and walked over to Brogan.
“There’s something wrong with you Brogan.” Jarrett said. Brogan ignored him. “I’ve never seen a man take so much pleasure in killing before. It’s like you feed on it.” Jarrett said and stepped uncomfortably close to Brogan. “Leaving men like that ain’t Christian. Some of them out there are probably still alive half starved and crazed by the sun.”
“Questioning Sundgren’s judgment can’t be good for a man in your position.” Brogan said, turned around, wiped his face with a towel, and pushed past Jarrett to get to his bunk and get his hat on his way out.

