Chapter 10 – Going Guerilla
	The Confederate winter offensive had gone from bad to worse. The effort to expel or distract the Union from executing their plan to take Atlanta was not working. The combined forces of General Forrest and General Hood only managed to increase the number of Confederate casualties and further embolden the Union forces to pursue the Confederate forces into Northern Alabama and beyond. Every line the Confederates formed collapsed under the weight of superior numbers and firepower.
	The precarious state of the of the Confederate line that wobbled like a soap bubble was not known by Doctor Pratt, Cassie, or John Brogan. They had a different set of concerns that centered on individuals. They had spent weeks living and working under the constant threat of being overrun; they had all lost their sense of fear. That is why when a particularly intense volley of cannon and rifle fire occurred, the only concern of those giving medical care was whether they had enough space and supplies for the new wave of wounded. Cassie looked around the grounds of the abandoned plantation calculating minimum space requirements and rearranging the placement of the wounded they already had. She did this as she wrung a blood soaked towel before she rinsing it in a tub of water.
	John Brogan was also busy and unconcerned about the implication of what was occurring just outside of the grounds of the plantation. His hands were raw from the constant stitching her performed sewing closed the men that had open wounds. He too, was concerned about having enough time to get to everyone who needed his attention. 
	Doctor Pratt, in his make shift surgery, which used to serve as the manor house’s dining room, was focused only on performing surgery as quickly and effectively as possible. He no longer heard the violence of the war around him, just the wail and yells from its pain. He would cut, probed, and amputated until he passed out and one of the slave attendants would have to pick him up and lay him in one of the makeshift beds until he woke again. 
	The noise of war came ever closer and was ignored by those who worked in and around the manor house. It was ignored until Captain Brogan noticed Confederate infantrymen running through the grounds with panicked expressions. Some of the soldiers were armed, others were unarmed. The armed soldiers would stop and fire, then they would continue running. Their expressions struck deep in the captain’s psyche dredging up the memory of the day he lost his men. When he stopped stitching, he looked around to see how agitated the walking wounded was. Captain Byrne was particularly agitated. When he followed Captain Byrne’s line of sight he realized why he was so agitated. Forming up at the hedge that delineated the edge of the grounds of the manor house were Union infantrymen. There were more than just a few and far too many for those on hand capable of fighting could adequately resist.
	John Brogan’s first thought was what to do with the seriously injured, but he realized that there was not enough time to do anything for them. There was time to get Cassie, the doctor, and the slaves and run. As John Brogan ran toward the barn where he last saw Cassie, Captain Byrne ran around the grounds bellowing orders trying to organize the walking wounded into a fighting force. His effort seemed hopeless as there were no weapons available, but that did not stop Captain Byrne. When John Brogan reached the barn he saw that Cassie was still unaware of the situation outside and was still tending wounded. He had to go and drag her away from the man that she tended. Cassie kicked, scratched, and screamed every step of the way to the entrance of the barn. He finally put her over his shoulder so he could move faster. Outside of the barn she was no less calm and John Brogan had to restrain her as she looked at him wild eyed and spitting.
	He locked his hand around her wrist and drug her by her arm headed for the manor house to get Doctor Pratt. He didn’t remember when she stopped struggling but she did; when he turned his head to see if she was still behind him he saw a look of fear and anxiety on her face that he had never seen before. She looked as though she was a mother who had just lost her baby. John Brogan wanted to stop and console her but he knew there was no time.
	John Brogan and Cassie found the doctor in the middle of an operation. When they implored him to leave with them he responded by saying. “Take the niggers and go! I have work to do here.” The doctor snarled. 
John Brogan had never heard such strong words from the doctor and realized that he wasn’t going anywhere. He looked at Cassie hoping that she was ready to leave without a struggle. She gave him a gentle nod and the two of them left the doctor and headed west on foot. As they went they were surrounded by panicked and fearful soldiers. They started down the road that went west but saw that it was filled with soldiers, some moving away from the fight and others trying to rally and form a fighting line. John Brogan realized that this was no place for Cassie to be and turned north at the first crossroads hoping to find a safe place for the two of them temporarily. Behind them, the sound of war followed marked by sporadic rifle and cannon fire that waxed and waned in intensity. Cassie’s shoes gave out after several miles and they were able to find a spring house in which the two could take shelter in for a while. Inside the spring house they sat in silence, just listening to each other breathe, trying to make sense of a world that just blew up in their face.

Of the many negative traits that Captain Byrne had, fear was not one of them. He spat on the ground behind Captain Brogan as he headed for the barn. Coward he thought to himself. The captain headed for the high ground and made himself conspicuous to the other Confederate soldiers. Along the way, he managed to wrestle a revolver away from one of the retreating soldiers. On the high ground he waved the revolver above his head and shouted wildly taunting the Union soldiers to shoot at him. It was not long before they obliged him. The shots missed him as he walked back and forth waving his arms. Some of the retreating soldiers noticed him and rallied around him. The rallying soldiers who could shot back at the Union soldiers who weren’t quite strong, or foolish, enough to cross the open field. When there were roughly a dozen soldiers around the captain he formed them up and had them prepare to charge. The sight energized the other soldiers retreating and walking wounded soldiers enticing more and more of them to rally to the captain. It was not long before Captain Byrne and his men established a temporary picket line.
Those who had not seen the captain before looked back at him in awe. His red hair, fiery blue eyes, and bellowing voice relit the flame of hope in many. That was before the Union response. The Union soldiers held their ground knowing that the manor house and surrounding area were targeted for shelling. When it started, it appeared as though the shelling was directed specifically at the manor house, but that was because the shells from the early rounds came from the same battery. As the other batteries started firing, the entire area was inundated with cannon fire. Those who were unable to move were slaughtered. Those who could move followed the captain as he retreated down the west road. After the barrage all that was left in the area around the manor house was splintered wood and shredded flesh.

Captain Byrne now had his new command. It numbered roughly sixty men but grew as he picked up stragglers still willing to fight and die for the cause. The captain was also able to procure a horse. It was one of the many riderless horses that roamed free after such skirmishes. At the head of his new formation, Captain Byrne rode the horse with ever growing pride, but his actions did not come without a price. The wound that Captain Brogan had stitched up was becoming undone by his activity. It had even started to bleed and the bleeding was getting worse. He knew he would need further medical attention soon, but he dared not let his condition be known to his men fearing that they would abandon him. His concern over his condition grew with the increased discomfort he felt from his wound.
Captain Byrne and his men camped some five mile northwest of the manor house in an open pasture that sat as a plateau overlooking the surrounding area. The sunny and dry October weather had given way to the damp and wet weather of November. The morning, afternoon, and evening of sunny days became the light and dark of grey winter days. In the mornings there was mist that either fell from the sky or rose from the ground that was, in the morning, warmer than the air. In this mist sounds could be heard without being able to see its source. For the inexperienced, it was easy to get lost. That was why there was no great surprised when a small Union supply train rode into camp thinking they had reached their destination. The young lieutenant that led the wagon train stopped the wagons, jumped off, and was greeted by the barrel of a pistol that rested at the end of his nose. There was no fight, just a sudden change of ownership.
The contents of the wagons were surveyed anxiously with the hope of finding food, uniforms, or blankets. Nothing of that sort was found. The wagons contained weapons and ammunition. Two of the wagons were filled with repeating rifles and ammunition. The frustrated and empty bellied soldiers went to report what occurred to their new commander who was still asleep. He did not handle being awakened well, and it took him some time before he came to see what had been captured, but when he was helped into the back of one of the covered wagons, he clasped his hands together as though he was about to pray and looked heavenward.
“God has given me my answer.” He said to Sergeant Jeffries the sergeant who supervised the capture of the wagons.
“Sir?” The sergeant asked somewhat confused. “The men are hungry. We could have used food more than we could have used this. Some of these men haven’t eaten for the better part of a week”
“Sergeant, with guns food can be commandeered. Even from armed Yankees.” The captain said as he looked over the new found bounty. “But I understand your point. Organize foraging parties to scour the area in search of food. I’m sure they’ll find something.”
“Right away, sir.” The sergeant replied and started out of the wagon.
“And sergeant, be sure and issue the parties the new weapons and a generous supply of ammunition to help ensure cooperation.” The captain said as he made his way to the back of the wagon.
“Yes sir.” The sergeant replied and helped the captain out of the wagon sensing he was in some discomfort.

Cassie and John Brogan had found comfort in each other arms that night and had fallen asleep next to each other. They were surprised when the door of the spring house was kicked open and a small group of Confederate soldiers entered. The four soldiers eyed John Brogan and Cassie warily in the dimly lit spring house.
“What are you doing here?” One of the soldiers asked.
“Our position was overrun by Yankees and we were forced to retreat. We used the spring house for shelter during the night.” John Brogan replied as he stood up and got in between the soldiers and Cassie.
“I don’t know any of our units that have women in them.” The soldier said brusquely. “Are there anymore of you in here?”
“No.” Captain Brogan replied.
“Outside so we can get a good look at you.” The soldier said and gestured at them with his rifle.
John and Cassie stepped outside into the dull grey light of day. The soldiers followed close behind them.
“Far enough.” The soldier said. He stood in front of them and looked them up and down before he walked around them carefully looking them over. “How did you two get so much blood on you? Neither of you are wounded.” 
“We worked at the manor house down the road tending Confederate wounded.” Cassie said incensed by the question.
“We didn’t see no manor house.” The soldier replied.
“No you didn’t.” Captain Brogan responded getting angry himself. “The Yankee’s shelled it. I don’t suppose they left anything behind to be seen. We were forced to leave when they started and ended up here.”
The soldier stared at the couple as he thought. “Come on with us. The captain will know what to do with you.” He said and gestured with his rifle for them to start walking in front of him.
Captain Byrne was surprised, pleased, and suspicious when he saw Captain Brogan and Cassie. His aching wound spoke to him first demanding desperately needed attention, but his desire to maintain control overruled the pain from his wound. “So captain, I see that you have managed to save yourself and your lady from the shelling. How many of our valiant wounded were you able to save?” Captain Byrne asked with the intent of preventing any doubt which of the two would command the group of men. The men that stood around Cassie and Captain Brogan smiled and snickered at the question. Cassie started to speak up, but Captain Brogan gently squeezed her wrist. His action did not go unnoticed by those around them.
“We work to heal the wounded. We were unarmed and had no time to move the infirmed, but I see that we are not alone amongst those who escaped the shelling.” Captain Brogan replied looking around at the faces of all the men that stood nearby.
“Of course,” Captain Byrne replied with less bravado than his previously. “We may need a pair like you around before long.” Captain Byrne said and looked at Sergeant Jefferies. “Break this up and make sure the woman is kept under guard by men you trust. I want both of them watched closely, but for now I will speak to Captain Brogan in private.”
“Yes sir.” The sergeant said and turned to the group of men that had gathered. “What’s all this standing around for?” The sergeant bellowed. “We have some food to find and not a lot of light left to find it in. Let’s get going!” The sergeant added and the group of men quickly dispersed.

Undercover of the wagon that Captain Byrne’s men confiscated and under the watchful eye of Sergeant Jefferies, Captain Brogan stitched Captain Byrne’s wound back up. It was a difficult job due to the fact that the wound had started to knit and dirt had reentered the wound.
“It’s a good thing my men came across you two.” Captain Byrne said from behind sweat, a grimace, and gritted teeth.
“You really should stay off your feet for a while until this wound is well healed.” Captain Brogan said between stitches as sewed the wound back together as best he could. “On horseback this wound will never get a chance to heal correctly.”
“You let me worry about that Brogan.”
“It may be the death of you.”
“If I die, you die. You hear me Brogan.”
“I hear you, but I am not God. You’ve got to give your body a chance to mend.” Captain Brogan responded as he continued to stitch the wound.
“I have to stay on my feet to lead my men Brogan and I will need you and the woman to stay with me until I am well enough to go without you.”
“This war, it, it’s almost over. We can’t keep throwing ourselves at them like this.”
“Ah, but that’s where you are wrong. We just need a new strategy.”
“What strategy could work for us now?”
“We all need to withdraw to our homes and fight them from there. They will never be able to manage a war against us if they have to shoot up and burn every farm and plantation between here and the Mississippi.”
“You mean go guerilla? We’d just bleed each other to death. Where is the honor in fighting like that?” Captain Brogan asked as he finished stitching the wound cutting the thread by biting it with his teeth.
“You would prefer surrender?” Captain Byrne asked clearly agitated but in too much pain to move suddenly.
“I would prefer peace before we run out of thread to stitch up men like you.” John Brogan replied then leaned back to relax.
“Sergeant, take this man back and keep him with the woman. Keep a close eye on them. We’ll be moving west by north with tomorrow’s light.”
“Yes sir.” The sergeant replied and reached out toward Captain Brogan to grab him by the arm.
“West by north? why that way? There’s nothing out that way.” Captain Brogan asked as the sergeant tugged on his arm to pull him out of the wagon.
“You will see Captain, you will see.” Captain Byrne replied as the sergeant pulled Captain Brogan away from the wagon.

The word of the Confederate loss at Nashville reached the now renegade band of Confederates. Most of the men spoke of it in murmurs, others talked out loud about Captain Byrne’s plan to go home and fight the Union from their homes. Food was scarce and many of the men were that much more irritable because of it. The sight of the possibility of food, such as a barn or chicken coop excited the men to near mutiny. It was only Captain Byrne with his willingness to shoot those who did not obey him and help from his core of recruits that enforced his rule that order was maintained.
For Cassie and Captain Brogan, they felt as though they were prisoners of the very cause for which they fought. Their only relief being a respite from tending the constant flow of wounded. The long series of cloudy days, broken up by cold clear days, numbed their senses. They went from where every waking minute was a fight to hold back the tide of death to the minutes stretching into hours as they plodded along with the other soldiers as they headed into Missouri bound for Arkansas where Captain Byrne planned to fight a guerilla war.
