Chapter 19 – The Darkness of Confinement
The courtroom was adjacent to the jail. It was accessed by an interior door that was usually locked unless defendants were being arraigned. The room itself was sparse. It had a judges’ bench, tables for the prosecution and defense, and a balustrade that separated the participants from the observers. That day the courtroom was empty except for the judge, Brogan, and Deputy Farnsworth. Brogan stood in front of the judge’s bench with his head hung low. His face and body were bandaged in the places where Drusilla’s whip landed. He stared down at his hands that were cuffed. The deputy held on to the chain that joined the two cuffs. The deputy face had a sardonic smirk as he watched the judge walk in and sit at his bench.
“John Brogan, this court finds you not guilty of murder, but you made a hell of a mess over there, for that, $60 or six months jail.” The Judge said and pounded his gavel as though he was swatting a bug. He got up from his bench and walked out of the courtroom. Brogan was led away from the judge’s bench and taken back to the sheriff’s jail.
In the sheriff’s office, Deputy Farnsworth led Brogan around by his handcuffs. ”I’ve got a special cell for you.” The deputy said as he walked Brogan past the regular cells, through a locked door, and into a dark hallway. The deputy stopped to light a lantern before they continued. “It’s a hole just for a critter like you.” The deputy said to Brogan then grabbed him by the handcuffs with one hand and held the lantern in the other hand. They walked down a short hall where there were two dark and smelly cells. Each cell contained a bed of wood planks and bucket for a toilet. The cells were slightly wider than Brogan was tall.  The deputy opened one of the cell doors and pushed Brogan inside. He then locked the cell door behind him. “Turn around.” The Deputy said and unlocked Brogan’s handcuffs and took them. “Hey Brogan, I hope ain’t afraid of the dark.” The deputy said, He turned, walked back down the hall, and slammed the door shut behind him.
Brogan was alone in complete darkness for a few minutes. Until the view port of the door at the end of the hall was opened slightly that allowed a tiny stream of light to pour through. Brogan moved so he could stare at it.
Days passed, and all Brogan could do was stare at the light. His facial hair started to grow in. It was the stillness and quiet that started to work on Brogan. For most people hell is an unbearably hot place of fire and brimstone. For John Brogan, hell was being alone in that dark cell with his thoughts. He was tormented by the anger and regret that he had never come to terms with. Memories were the devil’s pitchfork that cut deep into the emotional flesh of his soul. All that was him, Cassie, the soldiers of his command, the colonel, and the major visited his psyche in painful sorties. The all converged on him in that cell. Each image took a turn stabbing deep within with him having no hope of being visited by the relief of death. He could only hang his head low and twitch when poked by a memory that haunted him. Agony leads to madness, and Brogan had progressed well down that path.
Weeks passed, and Brogan continued to stare at the light. Locks of his greasy hair began to obscure the filthy bandage on his face. In his cell time moved very slowly. His mind filled the giant crevasses between heartbeats with thoughts. Thoughts that were, in the beginning, innocent, but like bubbles in a pot of water set to boil, they came faster and faster shaded and twisted by darkness and fear. They were the kind of memories that scratched and pricked at a man’s soul. Such was the path that Brogan’s thoughts had taken.

Kate, a petite brunette, worked with her mother at the town boarding house. She and her mother were finishing up serving lunch to those at the house, and Kate had prepared and covered one last plate from the meal to take down to the sheriff’s office. She walked down the main street from the boardinghouse and knocked on the door of the sheriff’s office. Her knock startled Deputy Farnsworth out of a light sleep. His feet were on the desk and he momentarily lost his balance. “Who is it?” The deputy asked while he took his feet off the desk and moved some papers that were in a pile next to him in front of him.
“It’s Kate. I have your lunch.” She said from outside the door.
“Come in.” The deputy said.
Kate walked into the office and toward the deputy. He picked up a quill and acted like he was writing on one of the papers.
“Where do you want me to put your lunch?” Kate asked.
“You can put it next to me on my desk.” The deputy replied looking as though he expected her to say something. Kate put the plate down on the desk next to the deputy. She paused for a moment before she turned leave. The deputy looked at her.
“You’re not fooling me Caleb Farnsworth. The whole town knows that you can’t read or write. So I don’t know what you’re doing with all those papers in front of you.” Kate said.
“I’m practicing.” The deputy said.
“Practicing what? You couldn’t possibly know what’s on all those papers around you. You can’t read.” Kate said.
“Who says I can’t read?” The deputy asked.
“Everyone knows that.” She said looking at him quizzically. “If you can read, then read me what is on that paper in your hand.” She added.
“I can’t.” The deputy replied.
“You see!” Kate said.
“It’s official business. That’s why I can’t. . .”
The deputy was interrupted by the entrance of Doctor Webster who stepped through the door and walked up to the desk where the deputy sat.
“Good, I finally found you in.” Doctor Webster said sounding a little irritated.
“Doctor Webster? What do you want?” Deputy Farnsworth said in a voice that feigned innocence.
“Is that prisoner still here?” The doctor asked in a more irritated tone.
“You mean the one who killed that saloon girl?” Kate asked with thinly veiled intrigue.
“The injured man, I told you to bring him to see me three weeks ago so I could re-dress those bandages. Did you forget?” The doctor asked.
“No, I just don’t think it’s safe for anyone to see him just yet.” The deputy replied.
“Look son, this is serious. If that man dies in your custody, it will be on your shoulders.” The doctor said.
“Yes sir.” Deputy Farnsworth replied.
“Then you’ll let me see him, today?” Doctor Webster asked.
“Yes sir.” The deputy said.
“Kate, you’ll have to leave now. I doubt that he’ll be any danger, but I don’t think he’ll be anything for a young lady like you to see.” Doctor Webster said.
Yes, doctor.” Kate said.
 “And Kate, have you or your mom bring down a good and healthy plate of food to my office.” Doctor Webster said to her as she walked toward the door. Kate nodded at the doctor and left. “And you bring the prisoner down to my office immediately.” Doctor Webster said in a tone that was more like an order than a request to the deputy.
Doctor Webster’s office faced the street and had large windows to make the room bright. The doctor washed his hands cleaning up after examining and bandaging Brogan. Brogan was behind him facing the windows. He had his shirt off and he was adjusting the fresh bandages the doctor had applied.
“I don’t know what got into that young deputy. He should have brought you down to see me weeks ago.” The doctor said then stepped over to a tray that sat near Brogan and started arranging the medical instruments that were on it. “I don’t know if you’re going to keep that eye. It still looks pretty bad. Are you listening to me?” The doctor asked. The doctor then walked around to look Brogan in the face. Along the way, he noticed that Brogan was looking at his reflection in the window.
“Wounds always look worse than they actually are. I’m sure they’ll look much better after they heal.” The doctor said and looked Brogan in the face.
“I’m going to kill that deputy.” Brogan said dryly.
“Now, now, don’t you think you’re in enough trouble?” The doctor replied.
“I’ve been hurt by enough people. It’s time for me to hurt back.” John Brogan said as though he was thinking out loud. 
The doctor shook his head as he walked over to the office door and opened it. “He’s ready.” The doctor said to the waiting deputy and walked back from the door to the tray next to Brogan. “You can put your shirt back on. And I’ll see to it that the deputy treats you decently.” The doctor added. The deputy entered the room as Brogan finished buttoning his shirt. The deputy put the handcuffs back on Brogan.
“Caleb, you’re not to keep him in that cell that you’d put him. He’s to get fresh air and some decent food every day. If you can do that much, I’ll think about what I’m going to tell Sheriff Dolan when he gets back.” The doctor said.
The deputy pulled Brogan off the table by the handcuffs.
“The sheriff and I have a deal, and you need to keep up his end until he gets back. You hear?” The doctor added.
The deputy took a long slow look at the Doctor. “I hear.” The deputy replied and then yanked Brogan off the table and pulled him by the handcuffs out of the room. Doctor Webster stared at them as they left.
