Chapter 16 – Brogan’s Exile
John Brogan ran up to the burning barn followed by the horse he rode. He attempts to open the barn door to give the animals inside a way out, but his action just feeds the fire. He turned around and headed to the house.
Cassie, after waiting for the gunfire to stop, peered out of the window. She saw a man with a horse in front of the barn. She shot at him with her revolver. John Brogan saw the flash of a gunshot coming from the farmhouse. He knelt down, took aim, and shot the person that shot at him from the farmhouse. He then scrambled over to the door that led into the kitchen and listened for any more gunshots. He opened the door and quietly entered the house. He went from room to room clearing the house. When he entered the bedroom he saw two bodies.
“Cassie!” John Brogan exclaimed. Cassie turned her head to look at him. John Brogan ran over to her. He embraced her limp body. The gun that she had in her hand fell to the floor.
“It was me. I am sorry John, it was me.” Cassie said. She died in his arms. John Brogan held her as tightly as he could as though he were trying to keep her soul inside her body. After a moment, he picked her up, carried her to the bed, kicked Parker’s body off the bed, and put Cassie’s body down in Parker’s place. He looked up for a moment and then burst into tears burying his face into her bloody chest.
“Oh, God no, Oh, God no.” John Brogan cried out in the darkness of the room.


It was raining. John Brogan sat on the steps of the back entrance to the church where he and Cassie were members. He was soaking wet. Pastor Goodwin opened the back door and stuck his head out.
 “John, it’s time you come inside. You need to dry off. Be presentable.” Pastor Goodwin said. John Brogan got up and went stepped in the backdoor of the church.  Pastor Goodwin led John Brogan by the arm to a seat in his office.
 “John, you need to be strong for her sake. You told me yourself that it wasn’t really your fault.” Pastor Goodwin said. Listless, John Brogan didn’t respond. Pastor Goodwin stood up to leave.
 “I’m going to do the service for the boy first anyhow. You can stay here and gather your strength.” Pastor Goodwin said and walked out of the office. John Brogan sat, drained of the desire to live, in the room alone.
It was still raining. A group of people were assembled around an open grave as a coffin was lowered into it. Pastor Goodwin could be heard saying some last words at the gravesite. John Brogan’s listless expression was gone. The people that congregated at the gravesite walked past John Brogan mumbled words of consolation to him. He nodded at each one as they passed.
*	*	*	*
John Brogan was clearing the remains of the burnt down barn. He angrily caned a mule when a remaining support beam wouldn’t budge. Jack Richmond approached on a buckboard and stopped.
“Whoa, John. Are you trying to pull that beam down or cane the hide off that mule?” Jack Richmond asked.
“What’s it to you?” John Brogan asked.
“I just thought if you could wait a while, I could bring my team over and help.” Jack Richmond said.
“Yeah, I guess so.” John Brogan said.
“No need to take your frustration out on that mule. He’ll never get that thing down.” Jack Richmond said.

As Peter rode up to the Brogan farm on horseback. Two pigs, in the dried out pigpen, sparred with each other for the last bit of food. He could hear gunshots. He followed the sound of the gunshots around to the back of the farmhouse. John Brogan was sitting shooting at the birds that fed on the grain in his now untended field.
“Pastor Goodwin asked me to check on you.” Peter said between gunshots. He was visibly nervous.
“Why didn’t he come himself?” John Brogan asked then shot at a bird killing it.
“He wanted to know if you need any help getting back to farming. I was supposed to give you a hand.” Peter said.
John Brogan holstered his pistol and turned to look Peter in the face. “You tell the pastor for me that. . .” John Brogan said. Peter slowly backed away intimidated by the look on John Brogan’s face. “That I appreciate his concern, but if he wants to say something to me, he should come himself.” He added after softening his expression. Peter walked back to his horse and rode off back toward town.
An hour hadn’t passed when Pastor Goodwin rode up to the Brogan farmhouse. He tethered his horse, walked up to, and knocked on the door.  “Brogan, John Brogan. Are you here John? Come to the door John.” Pastor Goodwin called into the house. John Brogan stumbled out of the seat where he was sleeping. An open brown jug was next to it. He walked to the door and opened it.
“I didn’t think that you’d be so quick.” John Brogan said slurring his words.
 “Drinking? I didn’t know you had a taste for it?” Pastor Goodwin asked.
John Brogan turned around and walked back into the parlor. The pastor followed. John Brogan lazily then sat back down in the chair with the jug next to it. Pastor Goodwin surveyed the house and then focused on John Brogan.
 “I’ve been patient with you because of the calamity that had befallen you, but the light from that candle burns low. Idleness is an invitation for the devil.” Pastor Goodwin said.
“And so now I am evil. I was wondering when you were going to. . .” John Brogan said before the pastor interrupted him.
“Stop it John. I’m trying to talk to you.” 
“What are you trying to say, that I should be happy that my Cassie is gone. I should accept that I shot her. That I should go on like nothing has happened.” 
“You and Cassie were building a very good life for yourselves here. I don’t think that she would want you to destroy that.” Pastor Goodwin said and rested his weight against the piano.
“Don’t do that.” John Brogan said and the pastor briefly stopped leaning against the piano. He went back to leaning on it before he spoke.
“John, it’s time you made a decision whether you want to continue living in that terrible moment in the past, or join the rest of us in the present.” The pastor said. John Brogan started to look away as he spoke.
“Look at me John. Each man has a path that he chooses to walk in life. You need to choose yours.” Pastor Goodwin said turned and walked out of the house.


John Brogan sat on a sack of seed on the train platform. The telegraph operator stuck his head out of the telegraph office window and looked both directions down the platform. When he saw John Brogan he stayed facing that direction.
“I’m real sorry to hear about your loss, but the train station is for people coming or going. What are you doing here?” The Telegraph Operator asked.
“Trying to make up my mind.” John Brogan said.
“About what?”
“About what to do next.” 
“If you don’t mind me saying, I heard about the shootout.” 
John Brogan slowly started to stand up.
“I mean to say I heard you’re pretty handy with a gun.” 
John Brogan sat back down.
“Yeah, too handy.” John Brogan said.
“I heard they’re looking for men of experience like you in the Utah territory.” 
“Who’s looking?”	
“Ranchers, Sheepherders, mine operators. They need men to help protect their interests. Pay is good too.” 
“Where’s the Utah territory?”
“If you stop by tomorrow, I’ll give you the flyer that I got from a conductor last week.” The Telegraph Operator said and pulled back from the window.
*	*	*	*

John Brogan sat at the service desk in the bank. The Bank Manager sat at a desk in front of him.
“We’ll be sorry to see you leave Mister Brogan. Your late wife was a wonderful woman.”
“So how much can you give me for the farm right now?”
“Well Mr. Brogan, seeing that you haven’t been tending to it and the barn has burnt down. I can’t see it being worth more than one hundred and fifty dollars.” The Bank Manager said.
“And that’s cash I can walk out of here with today?” 
“Well not today, but. . .” 
“Have someone come get me as soon as you’re ready.”
“Why certainly Mr. Brogan, I am sure that we can do this no later than tomorrow morning. Is there anything else we can do for you?”
“No.” John Brogan said. He then curtly stood up and walked out.
*	*	*	*

A stagecoach pulled up in front of the office and stopped to take on passengers. John Brogan, on horseback, rode up and stopped next to the driver.
“Is this stage going through to Fort Laramie?” John Brogan asked.
“Yes it is. Are you a passenger?” Driver replied.
“No, but I’d like to ride along with you.” 
“We don’t take on stragglers.” 
“I could ride along as an extra shotgun.” 
“You have a shotgun?” 
“I don’t have a shotgun, but I do have a model 1866 repeater.” 
The driver took a moment to look John Brogan over. He saw a medium sized man with brown hair he carried two holstered pistols, one of which was a La Mot, a rifle, and a sword all of which was conspicuously displayed.
“You fought in the war?” Driver asked.
“Yes.” John Brogan said.
“Which side?” 
“Does it matter?” 
“No not really. You’ve been in a lot of fights?” 
“Enough to know how to use all this.” 
“Well, I guess there is no harm if you ride along for a while. We leave at noon. If you’re not here we leave without you.” 
“Noon it is.” John Brogan said and reined his horse around to leave.
“Hey, what’s your name?” 
John Brogan turned his head and looked back at Driver. “Brogan, John Brogan.” He replied and turned his head back, spurred his horse, and rode off out of sight.
*	*	*	*
             Bright afternoon sun illuminated the Kansas plain as the stagecoach ambled along. John Brogan rode next to the overland stage. They talked as they slowly moved along.
“I’m kind of glad that you are riding along. What’s your name again?” Driver asked.
“Brogan, John Brogan.” John Brogan said.
“Brogan, right. Been on the trail long?” 
“Long enough. What’s this ride like?” 
“The wagon trail? Oh, it’s not bad mostly.” 
“Then why is it good me coming along as an extra gun.” 
The driver gently snapped the reins to spur the horses forward and keep up with John Brogan.
“Well, we do have had trouble with Indians and outlaws from time to time.” Driver said.
John Brogan turned to look at Driver. “How often is from time to time.”
“I can’t really say. It’s when they feel like it.” Driver replied.
John Brogan turned his head back. “Have you been attacked?” 
“They mostly attack the way stations where we keep the horses and provisions. Sometimes they go for the stage if they think there’s money.” 
“Is there?” 
“Don’t know they just pay me to drive.” 
John Brogan rode astride the wagon in silence for a while. He looked around at the flat prairie. “Do they come at night?”
“Who?” 
“The outlaws and Indians.” 
“Further along when the terrain changes, you’ll see.”
John Brogan spurred his horse and galloped ahead of the wagon. The wagon created a dust trail as it moved slowly forward.

A fire lit the exterior of the way station where there was a stable, guesthouse, and an office. All the buildings were crudely constructed. The passengers that were settling down for the night stayed near the stagecoach that was in the background. In the foreground, John Brogan sat on a stool with the station agent and Driver around the campfire.
“So, you’re still on the easy part of the trail. The Sioux typically don’t come this far east anymore.” The station agent said.
“What about outlaws?” John Brogan asked.
“They’re out there, too. They’ll come after you too when they’re not hiding or running from the Indians.” The Station Agent replied.
“Don’t pay him no mind. He’s just been listening to stories that all the other station agent’s share to kill the time.” Driver said.
“Old Tom here is just an Indian lover. He’s been out on the trail too long.” The Station Agent said.
John Brogan looked both men over.
“So what about it, Tom?” John Brogan asked. 
“My name ain’t Tom. And he’s just talking about what he’s heard. He has never actually seen anything. We ain’t had any real trouble with the Sioux, only with bands of young braves showing off.” Driver said.
“Oh, yeah, what about what happened at Whiskey Creek?” The Station Agent said.
“Nobody really knows what happened there. It could have just as easily been outlaws making it look like Sioux.” Driver said.
“If the Indians are no trouble, than why are you glad there’s an extra gun?” John Brogan asked.
“Like I said, you never know what you might run into out there.” Driver said.
Driver pulled out a whiskey flask he had in his vest pocket and drank from it.
“You run into Indians and all they want are a couple of horses and some blankets. You run into white men, they’ll shoot you as soon as look at you.” Driver said.
Driver gave John Brogan a long look without saying anything. Brogan got up, walked over to his horse, and got his sleeping roll. He looked around for a spot to settle down for the night. Driver offered the flask to John Brogan as he walked by. He took the flask and drained it.

The terrain of the Nebraska was different from Kansas’ flat grassy prairie. It was drier prairie with rolling hills. The stagecoach ambled along down the trail. John Brogan rode his horse ahead of the stagecoach to high ground. He dismounted and surveyed the area through field glasses. Further along into Nebraska the terrain changed again. It went from rolling hills with dry grass to the more typical dry western landscape of scrub brush, arroyo, and pinion trees. There were occasional rock outcrops. John Brogan stood on top of one of them. His horse was next to him. He watched the stagecoach pass through an arroyo below. John Brogan drank from a flask and stared toward the west.
That afternoon Driver had stopped to rest the horses. Driver slowly stood up with his hands in the air. He carefully reached for the shotgun next to his seat. The stagecoach shotgun rider is doubled over in pain next to Driver. Driver threw the shotgun to the ground. Four outlaws on horseback surround the stagecoach. The closest outlaw with a rifle moved toward the stagecoach.
“Everyone out of the stage! Slow.” The Outlaw said as he looked up at Driver. “Down on the ground old-timer.” He added.
Driver slowly moved to lower himself to the ground. With the sound of a rifle shot, the Outlaw’s hat flew off his head. The sound was followed by a shot from a pistol and his hat flew further away. The outlaws’ horses were anxious and the outlaws looked around to see where the shots came from.
“Next, it’ll be someone’s head if you all don’t move on.” John Brogan said.
The outlaws looked around to see where the voice came from but were confused by the echo in the canyon.
“Come on out! We’ll split the take with you.” An outlaw said.
“All I am interested in is you all leaving. Now!” John Brogan said.
The outlaws started to leave with some reluctance. One of the outlaws took a parting shot at Driver but missed. John Brogan returned fire and didn’t miss. The wounded outlaw fell from his horse. The other outlaws spurred their horses and galloped away. Driver immediately climbed back up on the stagecoach to check on Shotgun. One of the male passengers got out of the stagecoach to check on the injured outlaw. John Brogan came out of the brush on foot with his horse behind him.
“Leave him alone, he’s mine.” John Brogan said.
“But, he’s injured.” The Male Passenger said.
“So is Shotgun. Go help him.” John Brogan replied.
The Male Passenger walked back to the stagecoach to help Driver. John Brogan carefully approached the injured outlaw and stepped on his right wrist.
“AAhhhhhhhhhh!” The injured outlaw screamed. Driver and the Male Passenger looked over at John Brogan. John Brogan kicked the revolver near the Injured Outlaw’s hand away.
“He’s alright. He just doesn’t like losing his gun.” John Brogan said as he patted the Injured Outlaw down and forcefully lifted the him to his feet.
The Injured Outlaw, with his hands tied together, was tethered to the back of the stagecoach as it moved down the trail. John Brogan rode alongside Driver. It was sunset.
“Don’t you think that injured man should ride in the coach?” Driver asked.
“That injured man almost killed you and shot Shotgun. He’ll make it to the next way station.” John Brogan said and then slowed his horse, pulled out a flask, and drank from it.
The next morning the stagecoach continued to amble down the Nebraskan trail with its way illuminated by bright sun. John Brogan rode next to Driver. The Injured Outlaw was rolled up in a carpet. The carpet was tied to the back of the stagecoach with the rest of the baggage.
The stagecoach rolled into the town of Fort Laramie at a trot with John Brogan astride. It stopped at the stage line office. Driver jumped down and ran into the office. John Brogan untied the Injured Outlaw, who was now groggy, and dragged him toward the sheriff’s office. The eastbound stagecoach trotted into town headed the opposite direction. Saloon girls, in various stages of dress, hung out the windows greeting the men of the town. John Brogan took no notice of them. He opened the door to Marshall’s office and shoved the injured outlaw inside he followed.

The Sheriff’s office was dark, dusty and disheveled. All the shades were drawn in the office. Deputy Farnsworth, who was half-asleep, sat behind a desk with his feet up. Behind the deputy were jail cells. John Brogan sat the injured outlaw down in the nearest empty seat. The startled deputy sat up.
“You liked to scare me to death Mister. Couldn’t you have knocked?” Deputy Farnsworth asked. John Brogan approached the deputy and sat on the baluster in front of the desk.
“It was open.” John Brogan replied.
“What do you want?” The deputy asked.
“Him and a couple of others tried to rob the westbound stage.”
“So?” 
“Lock him up.” 
“I don’t have the keys.” 
“Then find someone who does!” 
Deputy Farnsworth scrambled to his feet, ran out of the office, and crossed the street to the bar to find someone who had a key to the cells.


John Brogan walked across the street and through the door of the saloon named “The Gold Bar Saloon”. He looked around the room. Driver was at the bar.
“Hey, Brogan, over here. There’s someone I want you to meet.” The Driver said.
John Brogan walked over to Driver. Nils Sundgren stood next to Driver. They both faced Brogan.
“So, you’re the man that saved my pay box.” Nils Sundgren said.
“You should have seen him Mr. Sundgren. He appeared out of nowhere, and scared them bandits off like a bunch of . . .” Driver said.
“They weren’t very good bandits.” John Brogan said.
“And you are?” Nils Sundgren asked.
“I’m not a bandit. I was just keeping my word to Driver.” John Brogan said.
“Tell him about the offer Mr. Sundgren.” The Driver said.
“How about a drink first, Brogan?” Nils Sundgren asked.
“How about a bottle?” John Brogan responded.
“Sure!”Nils Sundgren turned to face the bar. “Bartender!” He exclaimed.
