Chapter 2 – The Night Before
Major Owen had just finished lighting the oil lamps in his tent to offset the descending darkness of late afternoon. As he put the chimney back on the last lamp that he lit Corporal Reed snapped open the tent flap. He stepped in and stood at attention before he spoke.
“Sir, Lieutenant Perry to see you.”

“See him in.”

Corporal Reed stepped aside and saluted as the lieutenant stepped into the tent. Once inside, the lieutenant entered and saluted the major as the tent flap settled back into position upon the corporal’s exit. The major, facing the lieutenant, studied the young man that stood before him. The lieutenant was thin, medium height, and had sandy blonde hair that settled just below his ears. He still retained many boyish physical and emotional characteristics. His new uniform fit smartly and was one of the few features of authority that he could project onto the seasoned veterans he commanded. The major shifted his stance before he limped over to and stood behind his desk.
“Have a seat lieutenant.” The major said and started to pour himself a shot from the bottle that sat on his desk.
The lieutenant sat in the chair in front of the major’s desk and watched his commanding officer drink the shot. He put the shot glass down and started to pace back and forth in front of the lieutenant. The lieutenant followed the major with his eyes keeping a half stoic half curious expression on his face. The lieutenant discipline kept him from speaking until he was spoken to. When the major reached the entrance end of the tent he spoke aloud to the corporal he knew was standing just outside.
“Have our supper brought in as soon as it is ready.”  He said pausing before he continued pacing.
“Yes, sir!” the corporal replied from outside the tent. The lieutenant sat uneasy in his seat, his eyes continued to following the major, as he passed behind him in his sentry like pacing.
“Sir, I was surprised by your invitation. I thought you might want me to assist in tomorrow’s action.” The lieutenant said uneasily.
“I have assigned that duty to Captain Brogan.” The major replied his pace unbroken by the lieutenant’s query.
“But, sir. I volunteered to fight Yankees. The war will be over before I’ll have fired a shot.” The lieutenant complained with his back to the major.
“I have another task in mind for you.” The major said breaking his pacing to come around his desk and poured himself another drink.
“Sir?”
“Did you hear him?” The major asked after he gulped another shot. The major was quiet for a moment then took another drink and started back to pacing.
“Hear whom, sir?”
“Colonel Martel. Plume of our hats! Who does he think we are, Musketeers? He’s no gentleman, no gentleman at all!” The major said. His head twitched angrily to one side and then the other as if he were punctuating the end of each sentence.
“Sir, isn’t that the Colonel Martel that lead the charge at Patterson’s Creek?” The lieutenant asked and the major’s expression tightened to a frown.
“The same.” The major answered. His answer caused the lieutenant to break with protocol and turn around in his seat to look at the major.
“It’s my understanding that his charge turned the tide of the entire battle. His cavalrymen engaged a much larger Yankee force and kept them from turning our flank.” The lieutenant said excitedly.
“That was the story, but victories often whitewash the acts of the foolhardy.” The major answered in a low angry voice.
“Sir?” The lieutenant said as he snapped back around in his chair reassuming his face forward position.
“I was there, too. I was sent to Patterson’s Creek to support his withdrawal. My orders were not to cross the creek, but act as a rear guard should Martel encounter a superior force. He did, but he didn’t retreat!”
“Sir?”
“He took his men across that creek and kept them there to be slaughtered! And afterward, he tried to have me courts-martialed for not following him.”
“But, if you saw that he was in distress, shouldn’t you have . . .”
“I did exactly what I was supposed to do, and the board of inquiry agreed with my decision. You may be too young to realize this, but good soldiers follow orders!”
“Yes, sir. We have spoken of this many times.”
“That’s why I am having you be my courier. As my father always used to say to customers at the bank, ‘accountability is the hallmark of integrity.’”
Corporal Reed threw back the flap of the tent with a sudden snapping noise that canvas makes. He stepped in the door, came to attention, and saluted.
“Your dinner, sir.” The corporal said and waited for instructions from the major.
“Fine, have them bring it in then dismiss them.” The major replied over his shoulder still engaged with the lieutenant in conversation.
Corporal Reed saluted, pivoted around, and motioned to the three men that were outside of the tent. They first bring in a table in which they unfold, lay a tablecloth over, and set two places. All of which was done quickly and quietly. The two officers remained in repose while the enlisted men did their work. Two chairs were then brought in followed by two covered supper plates. The Corporal Reed signaled the men to uncover the food and stand at attention. The major walked over and inspected the food on the plate. It was a simple meal of roast chicken, beans and wild greens all of which was nicely displayed. The major gently nodded his head and Corporal Reed signaled the men to uncover the other plate and leave. They performed their task gingerly and left without saying a word. After the men were out of the tent, the corporal came to attention again.
“Anything else, sir?” The corporal asked.
“No, that will be all.” The major responded casually. The corporal saluted and pivoted to leave. “Oh, Corporal Reed.”
“Yes sir?” the corporal responded turning around sharply to face the major.
“Make sure that we are not disturbed, by anyone.” The major added and then nodded his head.
“Yes, sir.” The corporal replied. He saluted and turned once again to leave. The corporal closed the tent flap behind him and barked indiscernible orders from outside the tent. The sound of scrambling feet could be heard around the tent briefly before if slowly died away.
The major and lieutenant sat down at the table that had just been set up and, after a brief prayer, they began to eat.
“Eat hardy lieutenant. I am sending you to headquarters tonight with a communiqué.” The major paused to swallow before continuing. “I need to know their thoughts on the colonel’s action.” The major said before he put another fork full of food in his mouth. The lieutenant stopped eating and looked at the major quizzically while he finished chewing the food in his mouth. He sat up straight before speaking.
“Sir, aren’t they already aware? Why do I need to . . .?
“And good soldiers do what lieutenant?” The major replied giving the lieutenant a stern expression.
“Follow orders, sir. “ The lieutenant responded and went back to eating.
“Very good lieutenant. Now, enjoy your meal. You have a long ride ahead of you.” The major said and continued eating his supper.
*	*	*	*	*
	The major suddenly pulled back the flap to his tent and found Corporal Reed lounging on the ground. The corporal quickly got to his feet and came to attention. The major scowled briefly.
	“Corporal, have a strong well rested mount brought here immediately,” the major said.
	“Yes, sir.” The corporal replied and saluted before he ran off towards the corral.
	The major replaced the flap and turned to face the lieutenant who was sitting inside.
“You understand the importance of what you are doing?”
“Yes, sir.”
“The lives of many good men will depend on you getting my message through to headquarters and their response back to me before the morning.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Lieutenant, no detours or dallying with this message. Stay off of the main roads and do not ride along the levee. These are all places that you may be captured or killed.”
“Sir, may I ask the nature of the communiqué?”
“No you may not.”
“Just carry it to headquarters and return with their response. What you are doing is dangerous enough. I would send someone else if I had not promised them to the colonel.”
“Sir, I shall not fail you or the colonel.”
The major’s attention was drawn to the sound of an approaching horse. “Your mount arrives,” the major said. “Leave now and return as soon as you can.” The major saluted the lieutenant before he exited the tent. After the lieutenant left the major’s anxiety showed on his face. He stood by the tent flap and listened as the lieutenant mounted his horse and rode away.
*	*	*	*	*
	The wind shifted and the stench of the sanitation trench was blown away from the bivouac. Captain Brogan and Sergeant Devereux walked through the camp. Up from the corral to where the men camped.
“Captain, I think Captain Meriwether is right. The Yankees don’t bushwhack you. They just run you through the cotton gin and pick us out like seeds. But ain’t nothing they done that you haven’t gotten us out of.” Sergeant Devereux said in a voice loud enough to be heard over the crunch of the fall leaves.
“Sergeant, I just keep thinking that we’ve been lucky. Maybe, one of these times it may be our turn.” The captain replied preoccupied with other thoughts.
“Captain, I’ve been in a lot of actions. Sometimes its luck, but luck only takes you so far. You keep a cool head under fire. That counts a lot. I know it, the men know it, its time you just come out and say it before you forget and freeze up on us.”
“I depend on you men as much as you depend on me. I lead some men to their death. My only solace is that there are some familiar faces left standing when it’s over.
“Captain, there are some men that believe the only way they will ever make it home again is by sticking close to you.”
“Sergeant, you might want to tell them that might do better putting their faith in God instead of me.”
*	*	*	*	*
	Twilight had pushed the sun beyond the horizon far enough for the brighter stars to start to twinkle. Some of the campfires, those not still subordinated by the last of the daylight, began to glow in a silent show that indicated the size of the brigade. Captain Brogan walked through the camp to make sure that his men were getting prepared to fight. He walked past tents with campfires. Captain Brogan’s men could be heard talking and laughing all around him. They greet him as he passed.
“Captain, will you join us for some coffee?” Private Williams asked.
“Is that chicory or your Tennessee brew?” Captain Brogan replied.
“Sir, why don’t you stop and find out for yourself. We sure would appreciate you straightening us out about a few things.” Private Williams said.
“Sure, I’ll take a minute.” The captain said.
“Have a seat sir.” Private Williams offered as he leaned into the fire to pour some coffee into a cup.
“I can’t stay long. What’s on your mind?” Captain Brogan knelt down by the campfire Sergeant Devereaux stood next to him.
“Sir, some of the men are nervous about tomorrow. I mean, more than usual. The word is that we are the only unit moving out tomorrow. Do you know what we are getting into?” Private Daniels asked. Private Williams handed the captain a cup of coffee.
“I can’t say much about what is going to happen, but I can say that the hardest part will probably be the march there and back.” Captain Brogan replied.
“Sir, that was a lot of gold braid that rode into the camp this morning. Don’t the major usually get his orders by courier?” Private Williams asked.
“The colonel? He was just paying a visit to the major.” The captain said.
“Sir, we heard it was the Colonel Martel.” Private Daniels said emphasizing the word the.
“You heard right. And what business do you think he would have with this unit other than to visit the major?” The captain asked rhetorically.
 “Captain, we need to get going if you’re going to get those reports to the major tonight.”
The sergeant said and Captain Brogan stood up to leave.
“Boys, I’ve got to be moving on. Don’t drink too much of that brew. We need you two sharp for tomorrow. You boys get a good night’s sleep for a good day’s work tomorrow.” Captain Brogan handed the cup back to Private Williams and walked away.
“Thank you, sir.” Private Williams said to the captain. 
*	*	*	*
	The freshly lit kerosene lamp burnt brightly on the desk that Captain Brogan was writing on. He had just broken into a pace as he dispatched paperwork prior to the next day’s fight. The captain’s concentration was broken by his orderly who threw back the flap of the captain’s tent.
“Captain, Private Greene requests a minute of your time. I told him you were busy, but I thought I’d check with you.” Brogan’s Orderly said.
“That’s okay corporal see him in.” Captain Brogan replied.
Captain Brogan buttons the collar of his uniform. The orderly returned with the Private Greene. They both saluted after they entered the tent.
“Private Greene, Sir.” Brogan’s orderly said.
The captain returned their salute.
“That’s all corporal.” Captain Brogan said. The orderly left and Private Greene remained at attention. Private Greene was visibly nervous.
“Sir, thank you for seeing me.” The private said.
“At ease, Private. It is just us. What’s on your mind?” The captain asked.
“I just can’t stop thinking I am going to die tomorrow.” Private Greene said quietly.
“What makes you think you’re going to die?” 
“I don’t know, sir. I just got a feeling. I can’t stop my bones from clicking.” 
“You’re new aren’t you?” 
“Yes, sir. We are what’s left of my unit after the battle at Ruthersford Farm.” 
“Don’t worry, son. It won’t be anything like that. You stick close to me and you’ll be back complaining about the chiggers by dinner, guaranteed.” Captain Brogan said punctuating his assurance with a smile.
“Really, sir!”
“Now go back to your tent and get a good night’s sleep. We’ll be starting early tomorrow.” 
“Thank you, Sir.” 
The private saluted and turned to leave. Captain Brogan went back to writing.
“And Greene, you might want to stop by Private Daniels and have some of his coffee.” Captain Brogan said as he wrote.
Private Green turned to face the captain.
“Sir, won’t that keep me awake?”
“Not the way he makes it.” Captain Brogan said and smiled to himself as the private exited his tent.
