Chapter 11 – New Roots
	The spring of 1867 had been rainy, but the dry spell that they had been due for had finally arrived. Cassie had been in the habit of getting up at dawn’s twilight to make ready for the day, tasks which included waking her husband. Before she woke John Brogan she would walk around their farmhouse and look at its contents as it was awash in the magenta and pink of the new day. She sat in the parlor of their farmhouse and thought about their excursion up to Keller’s Point earlier that week. Being the highest point in the valley it overlooked the little town of Catensville Missouri where they settled. For her, the view was captivating. She could see the entire valley the little town, the surrounding farms, and Cameron Creek which cut its way through the entire panorama. Cassie loved the silence and stillness. The farmhouse, which was bought with money Cassie had left over from Paris, was fairly large. It was a two story structure with windows on all sides and walls of stone and mortar that had been whitewashed. The windows opened out, and on sunny days aired out the interior in no time. The furniture was simple. The kitchen table was rectangular and had benches that flanked its long side. The parlor had a couch, two chairs, and a piano which was her one indulgence. There were chimneys on each end of the house that facilitated fireplaces in many of the rooms of the house. Although it was rare that they were all lit, it allowed the entire house to be kept comfortably warm on cold winter days. 
	As the sunlight went from pink, to orange, and then yellow, Cassie decided it was time to wake her husband so they could begin their day. She went back upstairs to the bedroom where her husband slept and, after kissing his forehead, she gently nudged him awake as she had done so many times before. It had become ritual with them on mornings when she had to wake him. Most mornings John Brogan was up before the sun with his wife, but on mornings after a particularly strenuous day in the fields he would sleep in. This tendency was thought by both of them to be a residual effective of the war and tolerated by both: more she then he. Cassie went about the kitchen preparing a picnic basket while John Brogan got up, dressed, and stepped out to do the morning chores. At the same time Cassie fired up the stove and began cooking breakfast. It had been the better part of an hour before he returned to wash up and get dressed for Church.
	Cassie had breakfast waiting on the table by time John Brogan finished dressing and made his way back down the stairs. It was a simple fare that he consumed heartily. He was partial to how she prepared ham with fresh baked biscuits for him and applied generous portions of blackberry preserves on the biscuits. Cassie sat and watched him eat with an expression of serenity that she shared only with him. It was work to keep their little piece of heaven going, but it was moments such as this, when she could enjoy the fruit of her labors, that made the work worth doing.
“John.”
“Yes?” He responded with a mouth full of food.
“Did you ever think we would make it this far?”
	“What’d you mean? We’ve been here for two years now?” He said while he chewed his food.
	“I mean when we first met. Did you think that we’d end up together?”
	“When we first met? When we first met I didn’t even know who I was then. You know that. Think about what you thought of me, and actually, I don’t blame you for what you thought of me.” He stopped and swallowed a mouthful of coffee. “We’ve talked about this many times. What war does to people. I’m just glad we are out here away from the South and the carpet baggers and vengeful Yankees.” He added and bit into another piece of ham followed by biscuit and started chewing.
	“Do you think that people like us are rewarded for wanting to keep on, settled down, and keep the wheel of life turning?” She asked and then took a sip of  her coffee.
	John Brogan continued chewing until he had swallowed enough to speak. “I think we have what we have because it is what we wanted. We fought the war and lost. We have to accept that as the settling of the matter. It has taken me a long time, but to live like Byrne and his renegades is not living at all.” He washed the rest of his food down with what was left in his cup of coffee and swallowed. “He’s not fighting for the cause any more. He’s just out there spreading his hate like poison. Burning and pillaging the farms of those who have done him no harm. There’s no honor in that.” He added and stood up. “We better get out of here or we’ll be late for church.” Cassie smiled at him and stood up across from him. John Brogan reached across the kitchen table to take her hand. He walked her out of their farmhouse and lifted her into their wagon that waited with the horse already hitched and ready to go.
	The muddy road did not detract from the good spirits the ride put them in. The air was thick with the smell of hundreds of freshly plowed acre, mixed with fresh air, and invisible clouds of the smell of some flower or tree. The trees and bushes of the windbreaks between the fields were tinged with the yellow green of buds bursting to greet the sun or leaves in the first couple of weeks of life. The air was filled with the sound of various singing bird and the odd trickling stream. All of this topped off by the gentle warmth of a long absent spring sun. The entire effect, along with the ride on the wagon was intoxicating.
	Catonsville was a small town and existed only to support the surrounding farm communities. It was very much to their surprise to the entire community when the railroad came through and even built a small freight and passenger station. The rest of the town consisted of two general stores, a small hotel and boarding house, a livery stable, two churches, and some other small government and business offices. At a gallop, a man could ride from one end of town to the other in well under a minute, but to the towns inhabitants it was just big enough to serve all of their needs. It took Cassie and John Brogan more than a minute to go through town at the relaxed pace at which they moved.
	The church Cassie and John Brogan attended stood at the west end of Catensville’s main street. It was similar to the church in which they first met but stood undamaged by the ravages of war. On one side of the church was a long hitching post where the congregation could leave their horses. On the other side was an open field that was starting to come alive with grasses and spring prairie flowers. Behind the church was the consecrated ground of the congregational graveyard. The church itself did not have stained glass that depicted a particular image; instead it had panes of colored glass some of which were cut into geometric shapes. Inside the sanctuary was simple with an altar and pulpit at one end and pews for the congregation filling in the rest of the space. John and Cassie were typically some of the first of its members to arrive since she had become the de facto church organist. John Brogan stopped in front of the church and helped Cassie off of the wagon. He watched her walk into the church and then walked the horse over to the hitching posted and secured the horse.
	John eagerly walked back to the church so he would not miss a minute of Cassie playing. It was one of his favorite parts of his Sunday. To watch and listen to his wife play hymns on the organ and every once in a while she would play something from her time in Paris. It was all beautiful music to him and he had a favorite seat where he would listen to her play. Like clockwork, Pastor Goodwin would stop by and greet him on his way to the front door to welcome his congregation.
	John Brogan was known to be in the habit of closing his eyes when he listened to Cassie play. He did this before and during the service; it was a thing that the congregation had become used to. Today was no different. He sat in his seat with his hands clasped together in his lap, and like as usual, Pastor Goodwin walked by and in his resonant voice said “Good morning brother Brogan.” John Brogan would respond by giving the pastor a serene nod. It was like an acknowledgement to all involved that all was well. The church organ had its own story. It had been given up for ruin before Cassie’s arrival. The previous church organist, and even the man hired to fix the organ, had said it was broke beyond repair and was a lost cause. Cassie, through patience and the desire to play it, was able to coax music from it. It was broke. It had keys that made no sound and stops that would squealing at such a high pitch as to hurt the ears of humans and cause dogs and coyotes alike to howl. Such was the organ’s predisposition, but after a good cleaning and persistent attempts by her to play it, it finally yielded. The congregation remembers the day she got it to play being the day before advent; has not missed a Sunday service since. Others who have tried to play it still remain unsuccessful.
	Perhaps it was the weather, or the time of year, or a congregation that was healing from the scars of war, but the pastor’s sermon that day proved to be particularly uplifting. The sermon, accompanied by Cassie’s playing and particularly well chosen set of hymns left all present emotional and spiritual fulfilled: if just temporarily. Cassie played the postlude on the piano and the sunlight that poured through the church’s front door as the congregation exited added to the effect to the moment.
	John Brogan waited for Cassie as she gathered up the sheet music from the day’s performances and together they walked toward the door of the church where Pastor Goodwin was waiting to greet them.
“Your wife plays beautifully.” Pastor Goodwin said smiling broadly at both of them as he shook John Brogan’s hand. Pastor Goodwin turned to face Cassie. “Mrs. Brogan, we all do so appreciate your playing Sundays. You have brought new life to the voices of the congregation.”
“I am so glad.” Her cheeks started to flush with embarrassment.
“In fact, your playing has inspired some of the congregation to suggest that we start a fund for a church organ. Of course, I told them that we would need the consent of you and Brother Brogan.” The pastor said looking primarily at Cassie.
“I think that would be wonderful.” Cassie replied to the pastor and turned to speak to her husband. “What do you think John?”
“I am more than willing to share your musical talent with the rest of the congregation.”
“The current organ is fine although it can be moody at times, but if you feel that such a purchase would be good for the congregation I would be glad to oblige.”
 “Splendid, I’ll share the good news! We’ll see you next Sunday.” He patted John Brogan on the back as the couple passed by and turned his attention to the couple behind them.
John Brogan and Cassie walked down the stairs of the church and toward their buckboard tethered among the other assembled buckboards. He helped Cassie in, untethered the horse and climbed aboard himself. He then urged the horse forward and they amble away from the church down the road that went back through the town and to their farm. 
“I am glad the others enjoy your playing as much as I do. The pastor’s request makes me feel like we’ve have planted some roots here.” John Brogan said.
“Pastor Goodwin is a fine man. I wish we had known him when we got married.” Cassie said as she nodded in agreement.
“John, we aren’t going straight home are we?”
“Why?”
“I packed us a little picnic basket. I thought it would be nice if we can stop and eat it in that meadow on the other side of the bridge over Castor’s Creek.” She said as John Brogan turned and smiled at her. He then turned his head back around and snapped at the reins urging the horses to move faster.

	The rumble of the horse drawn wagon crossing the wooden bridge disturbed the quiet of the meadow that had been freshly carpeted with soft grass and wild flowers. After he stopped the horses, the gentle gurgle of the stream could be heard along with the songs of various birds. He got down off of the wagon and helped Cassie down. From under the seat he retrieved a picnic basket and an old horse blanket which he carried in one hand and held his free hand out for Cassie. The two walked out into the meadow and found a spot that was relatively dry but close enough to capture the atmosphere of the creek with the various bugs fluttering on and above its surface. Seated on the blanket, Cassie reached into the basket and pulled out two sandwiches. She handed one to John and started eating the one she kept for herself. They ate the sandwiches in silence. She didn’t speak until she reached into the basket looking for another sandwich.
“John, are you ever going to get rid of that sword and gun that colonel gave you?” Cassie asked as she groped around the inside of the basket looking at John to see his reaction.
“I don’t know. I don’t plan to.” He replied absentmindedly not looking at her when he spoke.
“Why do you keep it? I mean, we’re here now. The war is over, we’ve put down roots, and we have a farm. We don’t need those other things.” Cassie said searching try to make eye contact with him.
“You still don’t understand, those things mean something to me.”
“What could they mean to you now?” Cassie asked still trying to make eye contact.
“They are the symbols of a man’s honor. Now they are mine. I can’t just throw them away.” Brogan responded finally making eye contact.
“Then what else can you do with them? Honor died with the war.”
“For some men honor never dies.”
“What about us and now? Aren’t you happy? Doesn’t us being together and having a farm, peace, and a place to set down roots mean enough to let go those old memories?”
“A man lives by a code or he is not a man. The colonel and I were betrayed by another who we thought was a man of honor.” John Brogan said and looked away. The couple went back to eating their sandwiches in silence.  Cassie finished eating her sandwich first.
“Didn’t we get enough of that kind of honor during the war? I want the good kind of honor. The kind of honor your love brings me. That’s an easy kind of honor. It’s the kind of honor that everyone can live with.” She said and paused to think. ”Are you ever going to tell me what he said to you?”
“Who?” John asked.
“That colonel.” Cassie said.
“That? It was nothing.” John Brogan said.
“Then why did he leave you those things?” Cassie said.
“That? That is between us.” John said. He looked in her direction but past her at something in the distance.
“The colonel is gone. I’m your wife and I am here, now, alive.” Cassie said moving her head hoping to regain eye contact.
“There’s nothing to tell.” John replied flatly. Cassie stared at John Brogan in frustration and disbelief before she bit into a fried chicken leg and started chewing.

