Chapter 20 – Second Exile
The sheriff’s mining camp was a considerable distance from town and was profitable only when the labor that worked it was free. It was at the end of a rarely traveled trail that followed a creek into a small canyon. Trees of various types shaded the road along the way and rock outcroppings scraped bare by time and weather dotted the landscape. The mine itself was a hole dug into a steep side of the canyon. Once productive, ore carts on rails had been built to support the extract process. It also had a sluice that was used to wash the ore from the useless rock that was also mined. 
Deputy Farnsworth brought the buckboard he drove to the mine, with John Brogan sitting in the back with his arms and legs shackled, to a stop. The deputy got off the buckboard, walked around to its rear and pulled John Brogan off. The deputy then dragged Brogan behind him up the hill to the top of a mining sluice. A man stood at the top of sluice with a shovel. It was the injured outlaw. Deputy Farnsworth called him Deputy Pitcairn. Deputy Farnsworth and Brogan stopped when they were near the top of the sluice. Deputy Pitcairn tossed the shovel down at the two men. It landed near the Brogan’s feet.
“Morning Deputy Pitcairn. I have that prisoner that we discussed earlier. Doc Webster said he needed plenty of fresh air. I am sure you can provide that for him here.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
Deputy Pitcairn walked down from the top of the sluice. He walked around the shackled John Brogan looking him up and down. “Well Mr. Brogan, you are going to enjoy your time with me as much as I enjoyed my time with you.” He said then stepped back and leaned against the sluice. “Unshackle his hands only. We don’t need our guest wandering off in too much of a hurry.”
Deputy Farnsworth unshackled Brogan’s hand. “Brogan, if you run, he’ll shoot you in the back and dump you in the mine. So, I suggest you do what he says until I come back for you around sundown.” He said. Deputy Farnsworth walked back to the buckboard carrying John Brogan’s hand shackles. He got back on and left. Brogan and Deputy Pitcairn watched him leave. Deputy Pitcairn turned to John Brogan after Deputy Farnsworth disappeared from view.
“Life on this mountain is simple. Dig and live. You see this ore cart next to you.” Deputy Pitcairn said as he pointed to it. “You are going to shovel the ore out of it into the sluice here.” He then patted the sluice with his hand. “You shovel until the ore cart is empty. Then you are going to climb down out of the ore cart and muck out the mud that has gathered at the bottom of the sluice. You are going to keep doing that until Deputy Farnsworth comes back to get you at sundown.” The deputy gestured to Brogan indicating that he was to climb the ladder behind the ore cart. “Let’s get started shall we?”
John Brogan gingerly climbed the ladder to the top of the ore cart and started digging.
Deputy Pitcairn walked over and started the flow of water down the sluice. The deputy then walked over to a platform where there was a rocking chair, jug of whiskey, and a rifle. He sat and watched John Brogan work.

The noon sun was particularly hot that day. John Brogan was at the base of the sluice clearing the mud away from its base. He then led a pair of mules that brought another loaded ore cart next to the top of the sluice.
The western horizon had begun to pull the sun toward it, but was unable to check its intensity. John Brogan cleared a clog on the sluice. He shoveled mud and ore over the side. Once he cleared the clog, Brogan returned to shoveling ore from the ore cart onto the sluice. He looked up to see Deputy Pitcairn smiling back at him.
Deputy Farnsworth appeared on his buckboard as the sun started to touch the top of the trees to the west. Brogan felt a strange sense of relief at his appearance; his aching muscles responded by giving him one last burst of energy. It was enough to get him from the mine entrance to the buckboard that waited below. Deputy Farnsworth loaded a shackled and exhausted John Brogan into the back of his buckboard, once loaded Brogan’s muscle gave way to their exhaustion.
It was full dark by time Brogan and Deputy Farnsworth got back to the sheriff’s office. Brogan thought that he would never consider the jailhouse a welcome sight, but his day at the mine affected his point of view. Deputy Farnsworth closed and locked the cell door behind Brogan. “Hey Brogan, you have company.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
John Brogan slowly turned around and saw that there was a man, Miguel, in the cell next to him. The man in the cell looked back at John Brogan and smiled.
“A Dios Mio. I’ve been going crazy in this place by myself. Have you been in here long?” Miguel asked.
Brogan lay down on his wood plank bed exhausted. The ride from the mine provided Brogan just enough rest to allow him to walk from the buckboard to his cell without his muscles giving way. Once inside his cell he fell asleep almost immediately.
“Hey, what’s your name? What’s your name? Don’t fall asleep on me. Are you asleep?” Miguel said.
John Brogan began to snore.
“Damn, this place is no fun.” Miguel said.

It was still dark out when Deputy Farnsworth tossed a bucket of cold water on Brogan to wake him up.
“Get up you! You have another day working in the fresh air.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
Brogan got up with a start. He was soaked with water. 
“Is that what you’re going to do to me if I don’t get up?” Miguel said.
Brogan gave the deputy a hostile stare.
“Shut up you. Brogan, you need to listen to me when I talk to you.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“But, he was asleep.” Miguel said.
The deputy turned toward Miguel’s cell. “I said shut up!” Deputy Farnsworth said.
Brogan slowly got up and stepped over to the bars of his cell. The deputy shackled Brogan’s hands and feet while he was in the cell. He then got up and walked over to Miguel’s cell.
“Come on you. It’s your turn.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“Hey, what’s going on? I don’t have to do what he did yesterday do I?” Miguel asked.
“You can either do that or I can put you in a very dark cell for a long time.” 
Miguel complied with the deputy’s request. He was shackled the same way as Brogan. The deputy then opened the cells, pulled the two men out and shackled them together.
“Looks like you’ll have company today Brogan.” The deputy said.

Brogan and Miguel stood on top of an ore cart shoveling ore into the sluice. The cool morning air helped them keep up a steady pace. Deputy Pitcairn sat on his platform. His rifle rested across his lap and a jug of whiskey was next to him.
“My cousin Tomas is in Mexico now. We grew up together in San Juan De Carlo, but he got caught stealing some horses and had to go live with my uncle in. . . .” Miguel said.
“How’s your new friend working out for ya’ Brogan?” Deputy Pitcairn asked.
Brogan shoved his shovel into the ore with more force than necessary.
“How come you won’t tell me your name?” Miguel said.
Brogan took another violent shovel full of ore and increased the pace of his shoveling.
“Why can’t you answer the man Brogan?” The deputy asked.
“Because he’s been talking non-stop since we got up this morning.” Brogan replied.
Deputy Pitcairn pulled the rifle up and pointed it in Brogan’s direction.
“Tell the man your name Brogan.” Deputy Pitcairn said.
Brogan stopped shoveling. He wiped the sweat from his brow and stared at the deputy with an indignant expression. Miguel continued digging.
“Brogan, John Brogan.” John Brogan said.
“Louder.” Deputy Pitcairn said.
“John Brogan!” Brogan said.
Deputy Pitcairn placed the rifle back across his lap. “You see Brogan. Being friendly isn’t so hard.” Deputy Pitcairn then picked the jug up and drank from it.
“I’m sorry my friend. I did not know my talking would create such problems.” Miguel said.
“What was that?” Deputy Pitcairn asked.
“I was just telling my friend that I stink and am in need of a bath.” Miguel said.
“Oh.” Deputy Pitcairn said.
Brogan and Miguel went back to digging. The sound of each shovel full became more rhythmic and coordinated.

Deputy Pitcairn stood above Brogan and Miguel on his platform. The deputy appeared as a silhouette against the noon sun. A piece of bread from a loaf landed in the muck around Brogan’s feet. Miguel scampered around trying to catch the pieces before they hit the ground. Brogan stared up at Deputy Pitcairn as he broke pieces of bread off from a loaf and dropped them to the two men.
“What’s a matter Brogan, not hungry?” Deputy Pitcairn asked.
Brogan continued to stare up at the deputy.
“I suppose you two are a little parched.” Deputy Pitcairn said. The deputy put a canteen on the hook of a hoist, swung the hoist out over the men below, and lowered the canteen until it hovered just above the heads of the men below. Miguel jumped for the canteen as the deputy lowered and lifted it out of their reach.
“Aren’t you going to play?” the deputy asked.
“I only play games I have a chance of winning.” Brogan said.
“You’re going to need something to wash down that bread with unless you’re planning to use that muck for gravy.” The deputy said as he continued to lower then pull away the canteen.
Brogan leapt for the canteen. He knocked it to one side and freed it from the hook. The canteen fell to the ground. Brogan started to walk over to it, but he wasn’t fast enough to prevent the deputy from shooting a hole in it with his rifle.
“You two better drink fast or it’ll be gone!” The deputy said.
John Brogan picked the canteen up and handed it to Miguel. Miguel took the canteen and drank. He gingerly handed it back to Brogan so as not to spill any.
“A man who shares his water is a good man, indeed.” Miguel said.
John Brogan took a long, slow drink. Miguel offered Brogan one of the larger clean pieces of bread. Brogan took a big bite out of the piece of bread he was given.

The jail was dark. Deputy Farnsworth had left and put out the lamp. Only the light of a full moon illuminated the room. The two men could see each other only as silhouettes in their separate cells.
“Brogan, Brogan. You awake?” Miguel said.
“No.” John Brogan said.
“You think the deputy will be back tonight?” 
“Probably.” 
“You think they’ll set you free?” 
“Don’t know.” 
“What did they put you in here for?” 
“Fighting.” 
“The deputies don’t like you much.” 
“Nope.” 
“They’re trying to kill you, you know.” 
“I know.” 
“Do you care?” 

Deputy Farnsworth drove the buckboard, with his two prisoners in the back, up the trail to the mining camp.
“Your mighty quiet this morning Miguel.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“Nothing to say.” Miguel said.
“Deputy Pitcairn told me that you and Brogan got right friendly with each other after you shut up.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“I got tired. The work is hard up there.” Miguel said.
“Well you just got a good night’s sleep. So talk.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“About what?” Miguel said.
“About Brogan’s favorite subject, one of your cousins.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“I don’t have any more stories.” Miguel said.
Deputy Farnsworth turned around to look at Miguel.
“Bullshit! You start talking or I’ll forget to leave your water canteens at camp.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
Miguel looked at Brogan. Brogan shrugged his shoulders.
“I guess I could tell you about my cousin Benny and the land agent.” Miguel said.
Deputy Farnsworth turned back around.
“That’s better.” The deputy said.
Brogan leaned his head back to sleep while Miguel talked.
“Well, my cousin Joaquin was a copper miner in the Arizona territory. He got it when his father died, but the title was a Spanish land grant. There was this land agent named Owen who was converting all the Spanish titles to U.S. titles. If you had a title, all you had to do is go into the land office and have him sign it over from the Spanish to the U.S. Well my cousin thought why should he have to sign for land that was already his. . .” Miguel said.
The buckboard continued up the trail toward the mining camp.
Brogan and Miguel were on top of an ore cart shoveling ore into the sluice. The air was still cool and the heat of the day had not yet slowed them down. Deputy Pitcairn sat on the platform with a rifle in his lap and a whiskey jug next to him. His chin rested on his chest.
“Did you ever see that land agent?” John Brogan asked.
“What land agent?” Miguel replied.
“The one in the story you told Farnsworth on the way up here.” 
“Yeah, sure. I used to watch him in his office when I would go to town. He was a nervous old. .  .” 
Deputy Pitcairn looked up and pointed the rifle in their direction. Brogan and Miguel responded by go back to shoveling. “Hey you two! What’s all that whispering about?” Deputy Pitcairn asked.
“What whispering?” Miguel asked.
“Don’t get smart with me. You two were talking.”
“I was talking to myself.” Miguel said.
John Brogan stopped shoveling. “Yeah, why don’t you shut him up for me? I am tired of listening to him.” Brogan said.
Deputy Pitcairn lowered the rifle and put it back down on his lap. “You just keep talking, and shout out if Brogan tries to stop you. I know how to handle him.” The deputy said then sat back in the rocking chair, picked up the jug next to him, and took a long drink. John Brogan started shoveling again. Deputy Pitcairn’s chin settled back on his chest.
“What else about that land agent?” John Brogan asked.
“He had a limp.” Miguel replied.
“Did he act real proper all the time? Like he thought he was better than everyone else?” 
“Yeah.”
“Was he a southerner?”
“I don’t know. I couldn’t really tell. Why are you so interested?”
“Because, if it’s who I think it is, I have my own matter I need to settle with him.” Brogan said and started shoveling with renewed vigor. “Just follow my lead when the time comes.” Brogan said at just above a whisper.
Another day’s lunch brought another round of taunting by the deputy. Brogan and Miguel stood beneath the platform where the deputy sat waiting for him to feed them. Deputy Pitcairn threw two whole loaves of bread down to the men. He then tied the canteen to the hook at the end of a hoist before he lowered it to the two men. Miguel jumped to grab hold of the canteen. The deputy held the rope of the hoist with both hands as he raised and lowered the canteen. Brogan, directly underneath the platform, got a running start, leaped, and grabbed hold of the lowered end of the hoist. The deputy, surprised by the unexpected weight at the end of the hoist, was jerked forward. He fell off the platform and landed on his back some twenty-five feet below. The deputy appeared to be dead. Brogan and Miguel stood over the lifeless body looking down at it. The two men both looked up at each other at the same time.
“We got one more to go. Meanwhile. . .” John Brogan said and looked up at the platform.
“There’s a jug of whiskey up there and an afternoon to drink it.” John Brogan smiled as he wiped his brow with the back of his hand.

Light from the setting sun blinded Deputy Farnsworth as he drove the buckboard along the road that led to the mining camp. He approached a rock cut-through. Brogan and Miguel were crouched down on each side of the cut through waiting to ambush the deputy. Both men still wore ankle bracelets. As the buckboard passed through the cut, Miguel started twirling a lasso. He threw it over the deputy and yanked him off the buckboard. The deputy landed hard. He was disoriented when Brogan and Miguel walked up and stood over him.
“I hope you brought the keys to these shackles with you.” John Brogan said to the deputy.
“Yes. They fit too tight and my ankles are very sore.” Miguel added.
John Brogan searched the deputy for weapons and keys. He lifted the deputy and loaded him on the back of the buckboard where the deputy was also securely tied. Brogan and Miguel then drove the buckboard toward the mining camp.
“I’m going to teach you all about mercy boy.” John Brogan said to the deputy.
“Shouldn’t we be going the other way?” Miguel asked.
“What do you mean? I’ve got a debt to pay.” 
“What if someone is expecting him?” 
“No one is expecting him. He’s the one who sits in the jail all night watching people rot in their cells.” 
“Alright, but not too long. I’ve got a long ride home.” 
 “No, not too long, just long enough to get the bad taste out of my mouth.” Brogan said.

Brogan and Miguel had freed themselves from their ankle bracelets. Deputy Farnsworth’s feet were tied and he was hanging upside down on the hoist. Brogan walked around the deputy in a semi-circle cracking the buggy whip he found in the buckboard. The deputy started whimpering and then started to bawl. Brogan smiled before he started whipping the deputy. The result of the whipping was hard to see in the fading light. Miguel’s hand grabbed Brogan’s wrist when the deputy stopped crying out in pain. Brogan struggled with Miguel briefly. He then lowered his arm and walked away to un-harness the horses from the buckboard. He then walked the unharnessed horses over to where Miguel stood.
“Come on, we have a land agent to find.” John Brogan said. The two men mounted their horses bareback and rode off into the dark.
