Chapter 4 – Day and Night
	The Cunard lines SS. Persia steamed into New York harbor with the wheels of her side paddles churning water with the same ease as they did when they left Liverpool. The three masts cut the city’s skyline into a triptych for those who saw her steam up river from the shore. The smoke of her funnel trailed behind. Many of the ship’s passengers crowded the deck for their first view of America. To their right was the view of Brooklyn, the mouth of the East River and the Battery. To their left, was Jersey City lined with factories and docks. Cassie followed Rene to the deck’s railing as the ship entered the Hudson headed to a berth on the city’s West Side. Cassie squeezed in next to Rene at and stared at the shoreline with indifference. “I suppose we speak French from here on until we are in friendlier territory,” she said and grabbed her hat to prevent a wind gust from carrying it off.
	“You are all Americans. It will all work out in the end.” Rene said as he squeezed her arm reassuringly just above the elbow. He let go and turned around to face the ship and leaned against the railing. “But I do believe we should follow Fedder’s instructions to the letter.” He stood up straight. “Come let us finish packing so we can be on our way as quickly as possible.”

	Cassie took a last look back at the steamship after she entered the taxi followed by Rene. At over 300 feet long, and with two large side paddle wheels, the ocean going vessel was an impressive sight. Cassie’s lingering stare reminded her that every look back meant a step forward into an uncertain future. Drawing on her resolve, she took a deep breath and turned her head to look forward just as the horse started off. They headed for the ferry to cross over to the New Jersey side and meet with Fedder’s first contact. Their cab ride was a silent one. Cassie stared blankly forward while Rene looked from side to side taking in the sights that the New York waterfront had to offer. By this time, he had come to accept Cassie’s silences and remained silent until she felt the need to speak. He would look at her trying to surmise what thoughts lay behind her facial expression. When his thoughts were not occupied with Cassie he focused on reshaping his own thoughts for the journey ahead. His brief conversations with Cassie during the crossing about what life was like in America were heavily weighted by her privilege. When he tried to press her about what she remembered about a man’s perspective she became irritable. Frustration gnawed at him like a nagging ache. He knew that he could not be too inquisitive with the fellow passengers for fear of raising suspicions.

	They crossed the Hudson to Jersey City on a ferry run by one of the railroads, and took a taxi to the residence of the Gerald and Miriam Grimes. It was late afternoon and the sun was just above the rooftops of the townhouses on the Hudson Street address that Fedders had given them. Rene paid the taxi driver and asked him to wait. He stepped from the taxi absentmindedly fondling the lion’s head medallion that was given them and, when presented, would provide them entry into the home of a local who was sympathetic to their cause. As peculiar as Fedders was, he did have a way of instilling trust in his word. Rene walked up the stairs to the door of the townhouse and rang the bell. The door was answered promptly by a swarthy balding man with a prominent and crooked nose. It appeared to have been knocked out of joint on several occasions and never set straight. 
	“Gerald Grimes?” Rene asked.
	“And if I am?” The man at the door asked.
	“I was told to show you this,” Rene responded and discreetly pulled the medallion out of his pocket so the man could see it.
	“Are you alone?” The man asked looking over Rene’s shoulder at the taxi with a serious expression on his face.
	“No, the woman is with me.”
	“And the driver?”
	“We hired him just for the ride from the ferry.”
	“Very well then, give us a minute to prepare a space for you. It’s unusual for Fedders to send people unannounced.”
	“He mentioned that. We were in a hurry and our ship would have arrived as fast as any letter.”
	“Have the boy leave your luggage by the sidewalk. We’ll bring it in ourselves and talk more inside. I don’t like talking business in the street.”
	Rene turned and walked back toward the taxi to follow the instructions he was given. Gerald closed the door with a force just short of a slam. After helping Cassie out of the taxi, Rene had their luggage placed on sidewalk and they waited for the Gerald to return. After a quarter of an hour, Gerald reappeared and let his unexpected house guests in. Gerald’s assistance with the luggage was to hold the door open as Rene carried it from the curb to inside the house. After all the luggage was inside, Gerald closed the door.
	“You can leave your luggage here. You won’t be here that long. We’ve prepared a room for you upstairs. You should go up now, keep quiet and wait until we call for you. We can talk about what we need to do for you later on.” Gerald said and walked away without waiting for a response or entertaining questions. After the first class service they received on the ship, their host’s attitude came as a shock and left them both speechless until he disappeared down the hall. Rene’s impulse was to laugh, which was an urge he suppressed because of the look on Cassie’s face.
	“I guess the deluxe service leg of this trip has come to an end,” Rene said with a raised eyebrow. “It had to happen at some point. Its better we get used to it sooner rather than later.” He added lifting one of the smaller pieces of luggage. “Fedders was right about how we should pack our things. This is all I think we’ll need for tonight.” Rene said as he started up the stairs followed by Cassie.

	After a simple and unceremonious breakfast of oatmeal, bacon, and coffee, the breakfast dishes were cleared and the shades of the townhouse’s parlor were drawn. The dining room’s gaslight chandelier was lit to illuminate the Colton’s railroad maps that had been spread out over the room’s table. Gerald Grimes lit a cigar and left it in an ashtray to burn making the stuffy room even more uncomfortable. Both he and Rene leaned over the table and began to examine the maps closely. Gerald stopped when he realized that Cassie was still in the room.
“This is man’s work. Why don’t you go into the kitchen and strike up a conversation with Miriam,” Gerald said as he stood upright. An uncomfortable moment passed while Cassie decided whether to respect the request. Cassie sighed then unceremoniously turned and walked into the kitchen. Gerald stared at Rene briefly before he started to lean back over the map.
“It will be European attitudes like that that will create trouble for you two. I shouldn’t had to have told her that. She should have known, and if she didn’t, you should have told her,” Gerald said pointing his finger at Rene as he spoke. He then returned to surveying the map.
“See, you can ride the railroads almost to the Kentucky Tennessee border. Certainly as far as Louisville” He said and began traced the line of travel with his finger from start to end. “I figure it might take you a week, ten days at the most.”
“That long?” Rene replied as he watched Gerald’s finger move over the map. Gerald’s expression darkened. He was annoyed by Rene’s response.
“The nation is at war. You’ll have, I don’t know how many train and railroad changes. These things take time.” Gerald paused to puff his cigar. “It beats walking,” he added with the cigar locked between his teeth.
“Yes, yes it does,” Rene responded realizing the effect of his response.
“Here, get me that stack of schedules over there, and we can work out just about how long,” Gerald said taking a few more puffs of the cigar before he put it back in the ashtray. Rene stepped over to a nearby table where there was a stack of railway schedules.
“Have you tried Cuban’s?” Rene asked as he handed Gerald one of the stacks of schedules.
“Cuban what?” Gerald responded as he flipped through the stack of folded schedules.
“Cigars, they are quite fine. You’d find them slightly sweeter and a little more aromatic than what you currently smoke,” Rene added as he watched Gerald.
“Smoke American,” he replied. “And it would be a good idea for you to start.” Gerald added as he turned and reached for his smoldering cigar. He stuffed it in his mouth between his teeth and cheek and puffed it enthusiastically. “This cigar is half of what this war is about. Who cares how they treat the niggers that pick the tobacco. These abolitionists, they care enough to tell someone else how to treat them but not enough to buy their own to coddle. If this goes badly for the South I might be out a lot of money” Rene coughed as the air thickened with smoke. “The smoke bother you?” Gerald asked as Rene retreated from the room.
“No, I just have to use the latrine,” Rene said as he entered the kitchen on his way to the outhouse. Gerald could be heard from the dining room laughing heartily.

The next morning Cassie and Rene were directed to go to the Newark Junction railroad station the point at which they were to begin there train ride to Lexington Kentucky. In Lexington, they were to meet with a Mister Gilbert Chaime who would be willing, and available to provide them transportation further south. They were also given a leather pouch that contained railroad schedules, maps, and instructions on their use to reach their destination. Neither breakfast nor help getting the luggage from the house to the taxi was offered by their hosts. The goodbye was short and consisted of the exchange of ten gold sovereigns for the Grime’s assistance and hospitality. Upon reaching the train station, it was found that a dozen American cigars were in the pouch with the other travel documents. The cigars were, no doubt, a parting gift.
The rail accommodations seemed Spartan in comparison to what they experienced in Europe. There was only coach seating on the trains, and the seats were wooden benches not the high backed cushion compartments that they expected for at least some part of the journey. Their rail trip was filled with confusion, contemptuous rail workers, and slow moving trains that progressed on a schedule much slower than was printed. When they arrived in Lexington Kentucky, Rene insisted upon spending three days at the finest hotel in town before moving on. As annoyed as Cassie was with the delay, she could not help but concede to his demand because even she welcomed the respite.
During their three day stay, Rene had identified several complaints. First, and foremost of his complaints was the high summer heat and humidity of high summer that neither of them expected or accounted for. Second, he complained, only to Cassie, about the treatment of the slaves, and third, he complained about the food and how he found it difficult to digest. His concern about the slaves did not go so far as to prevent him from having a boy sent up to fan him while he slept, but Cassie had to intervene and remind her traveling companion not to tip the boy. His concern about the treatment of the slaves prevented him from walking the streets of the city for concern of their being an incident that would expose his sentiments. Cassie was quick to remind him that he was now in time and place where actions replaced words. The two travelers spent most of their time lounging at their hotel gathering their strength for the final leg of their journey. Being so close to home Cassie was in unusually good spirits.
They met Mister Gilbert Chaime quite by accident on the night prior to their planned visit. Mister Chaime had come into town to discuss some business at the court house and had stopped at the hotel bar to have a drink. The two men happened to strike up a conversation quite by accident and Rene was quite surprised when his acquaintance introduced himself. Rene quickly, but discreetly, displayed the talisman that Fedders had provided them for their journey. The expression on Chaime’s face went from jovial to quite serious. He led Rene to a quiet area in the hotel lobby.
“What is it you need from me?” Gilbert Chaime asked.
“We wish to reach Corinth from here. Can you help us?” Rene replied in a whisper.
Gilbert Chaime paused to think before he responded. “I will need a day before I can do anything for you. I have business here in town. While I am here I would appreciate it if you kept our acquaintance to yourself and I prefer us not be seen together again.”
“Of course.” Rene responded.
“Then until the day after tomorrow.” Gilbert Chaime said then turned and left the hotel. Rene, intrigued by Gilbert Chaime’s response went upstairs to his room and to inform Cassie of what just happened.

Cassie and Rene met Gilbert Chaime in the livery stable as they were instructed. His plan was novel. Cassie and Rene were to dress up as slaves and he was to drive them south in his wagon. Cassie, anxious to get home did not question Gilbert’s plan and Rene was unaware of the full implication of the plan. With faces painted with axel grease, hair from the wool of a black sheep, and tattered old clothes retrieved from Chaime’s own slaves the two were dressed and rode away on the back of a wagon driven by Chaimes. Chaime’s himself was dressed as a not so well off farmer. Cassie and Rene sat amongst the bales of hay so only their heads and shoulders were exposed. They made good time from Lexington Kentucky south toward Nashville and beyond traveling twenty-five sometimes thirty miles in a day. Once they made it passed Savannah Tennessee and crossed the Tennessee river it looked as though all that was left was the day’s ride into Corinth.
It wasn’t until they crossed a creek over a bridge that they had their first confrontation. That is when the trouble started. There was a man, a traveling merchant by his appearance, whose wagon was stuck in a rut and his one horse was unable to pull the wagon out so they could cross the bridge. It wasn’t really Rene’s fault. He did not know any better and no one told him that slaves don’t stare at white men in distress, but when Rene and his traveling partners cleared the bridge Rene stared at the merchant who was stuck. The frustrated merchant saw Rene, in black face, stare at him. That was when the merchant called out to Chaime telling him to stop his wagon. Chaime kept moving pretending not to hear the man, but the man gave chase and Chaime, not interested in casting any suspicion stopped.
“Hey, hey, I need your nigger.” The merchant said wiping his brow with his soaking wet handkerchief.
“What?” Chaime responded trying to sound annoyed by the request.
“I need your nigger. This ain’t no work for a white man and you have that big old strapping boy in the back of your wagon. I just need him to push my wagon out of a rut. It won’t take long.” The merchant said taking a more conciliatory tone.
“I don’t think I can let you use him. . .” Chaime replied.
“You don’t think? What kind of a white man are you?” The merchant asked starting to become annoy.
“The kind that keeps his slaves to do his own work.” Chaime replied.
“Perhaps this will help you in your decision.” The merchant said as he pulled out a revolver and pointed it at Chaime. “Now get your nigger down off of the wagon so he can help me.”
Rene and Cassie looked on with some concern. She was afraid to speak fearing that her voice would give her away. Instead, she gestured to Rene to get down; Rene reluctantly climbed off of the wagon and started walking back toward the wagon that was stuck. It was all wrong and the merchant knew it. Rene’s boots were too new for a slave to be wearing. He walked with his back straight and his shoulders back. He looked too proud. His last mistake was that he turned around and looked the merchant directly in the eye. The merchant shot Rene like he was shooting a rabid dog. He was hit in the chest and fell immediately. Cassie shrieked and the merchant turned around to see Chaime with a revolver pointed at him. Chaime shot the merchant in the head. The merchant died immediately. Cassie and Chaime ran to Rene who was still breathing, but his breathing was labored. The carried him back to the wagon and left the scene.
“Don’t worry, I know someone who is nearby who can help.” Chaime said looking back at Cassie and appearing visibly disturbed by what happened. It was thirty minutes of bumpy road before Chaime turned the wagon into the drive of Doctor Silas Pratt.
Doctor Pratt lived in a modest home on the road between Savannah and Corith. Chaime knew that he would attend to anyone, even slaves. So when Gilbert Chaime arrived at Doctor Pratt’s home he was sure that their problems would be resolved. The doctor had been napping when Gilbert knocked at his door. He walked out, took one look at Rene and pronounced him dead. Cassie was devastated and clung to Rene’s body. Chaime finally convinced her that Rene’s body should be removed from the wagon so he could go back and attend to the body of the merchant to avoid any further suspicion. The dust of Chaime’s wagon as it moved down Doctor Pratt’s driveway was the last Cassie ever saw of Gilbert Chaime.
Doctor Pratt waited inside for Cassie to finish mourning over Rene’s body. It was not until late in the night did he hear her knock at the door as he sat in his parlor reading a book by lantern light. He let her in and led her to a chair near his and sat her down. She sat and stared at the light of the lantern. Finally, Doctor Pratt spoke.
“The Lord has him now. There’s nothing you can do.” He said as gently as possible. Cassie nodded slowly in acknowledgement. “Do you have someplace safe you can go or would you like to stay here?”
“How far are we from Corinth? Cassie asked barely audible.
“Oh, I’d say about a good fifteen miles.”
“Do you have a horse I can borrow?” She asked in a whisper.
“No.” The doctor said shaking his head. “They’ve taken all of my livestock.”
Cassie looked up toward a corner of the room. Do you have some place I can clean myself up.” She asked and started to get up from her chair. The doctor led her to his office where he had soap to help her wash the paint off of her face. When she was done, she walked back into the parlor. The doctor had fallen asleep and she watched him as he rested peacefully. She put out the lantern next to him and walked out of the door and down his drive on her way to Corinth on foot.
