Chapter 1 - Settling the Debt
As he rode past at a canter, the shadow of a Confederate soldier on horseback was distorted by the late afternoon sun of a mid October day. The golden stalks of grass were briefly blackened by his shadow as he passed. He stared intently at his objective, a deserted farmhouse. His shoulder length hair hung over a face hiding freshly healed scars. From time to time, he winced with pain as his horse brought him nearer his destination.
	In front of the farmhouse, he paused to prepare himself. His expression changed from one that masked pain to one of righteous determination. He shifted his weight to his left leg and grabbed the stirrup’s horn with his left hand to dismount. Imprisoned by pain, it took him three attempts before he was successful getting his right leg over the saddle. He slowly lowered himself to the ground, steadying himself with his bent left leg and right arm that was anchored to the saddle’s horn. When his right foot touched the ground, he let go of the saddle; the horse stirred in response to the change in tension. He walked to the front of the horse with a pronounced limp and tethered it to the hitching post with his left hand. He paused to gather his strength and straighten his uniform. He was an officer, and he took special care adjusting his saber and side arm.
	He walked with an arrogant swagger, doing his best to hide his limp, up to the door of the farmhouse, opened it, and stepped inside. Seated inside, was another Confederate officer who stood up when he entered. The two men looked each other over, not as enemies, but not as friends either.
	“I did not expect to see you back so soon,” Major Ira Owen said as he stared at the man in the doorway.
	“I did not expect to be back,” Lieutenant Colonel Beau Martel replied. “I did not think you would respond to my note.” He added and then closed the door behind him.
	The major sat back down and gestured to the colonel to take the seat across from him. The look on the colonel’s face showed a hint of disgust, and he chose another seat. The colonel rested on the seat’s arm where his saber and side arm remained visible and accessible. The sun poured into the room at an angle almost parallel to the floor. The colonel noticed the oil lanterns, which sat on the mantle behind him, were lit.
“Drink?” the major asked. 
The colonel nodded and the major got up, walked over to a nearby table, and poured brandy from a bottle into two tin cups. He brought the cups, and the bottle, back with him to his seat. The colonel noticed the major’s limp.
	“How’d you get that?” the colonel asked as he accepted the cup from the major.
	“Patterson’s Creek.” The major replied as he put the bottle down between them before he sat down.
	“I thought your wounds from that were minor?”
	“Nothing that happened there was minor.”
	Cannon fire could be heard in the background.  It was harassing fire, the dueling of opposing batteries. The parlor, inside the farmhouse, was not too far from the forming battle lines where the two men sat drinking brandy. The boots of the two men were dusty as were their uniforms.
	The colonel lifted the tin cup to his mouth to drink with his only arm, having lost his other arm earlier in the war. As the two sat, the colonel’s thoughts drifted back to his life before the war when he had both arms. He thought about his southern gentlemanliness, and how, ever since he was young, he was fearless in the execution of what he felt was his duty.  He remembered the time he retrieved a woman’s wedding ring, from the midst of a pack of blooded hunting dogs using the arm that he recently lost, without even the slightest hint of fear or reservation. 
In almost any society, his personality would have made him an admired and respected man, but the curious mixture of pride and modesty, that his society’s code dictated, created the situation where he sustained the grievous injuries that almost put him out of the war permanently. He still would be sitting at home, nursing his wounds, had it not been for the misfortunes of the Confederate Armies and their desperate need for men with his skills.  He learned, through his gallant yet reckless charge, that righteousness of cause does not engender invulnerability.  He not only injured himself, but he also lost many seasoned and valiant soldiers that his cause could use at this point.  The lesson had not been wholly lost with him, but deep wounds heal with scar tissue, even emotional wounds.
	Major Ira Owen sat across from the colonel in a squeaky old wooden chair that told of every shift in posture.  He stared out the parlor’s window lost in his own thoughts about the war.  The major’s thoughts were very different from the colonel’s.  Major Owen loathed the war and thought of it as an inconvenience.  He felt it impeded his enjoying the privileged lifestyle he felt was his birthright. His only goal was to survive the war with his body and reputation intact.
	“You understand what I am asking of you?” the colonel asked breaking the long silence between them.
	“I believe so.”
	“I need this diversion to blood up my boys.”
	“A final maneuver before the fight.” 
The major shifted in his squeaky chair.  He lifted the tin cup and finished its contents with some of it pouring out of the side of his mouth and down his cheek.
	“Major, I never asked you what really happened back at Patterson’s Creek. I mean unofficially, man to man.”
	“But you will ask now.” The major said wiping his cheek with the back of his hand.
	“There was talk . . .,” the colonel continued.
	“We got there too late,” the major replied raising his voice. “There was nothing we could do,” he paused for a moment. “The maps were wrong,” he added before he looked up toward the ceiling.
	“There was talk major,” the colonel replied sharply.  “There was talk about you taking your time. There was talk about you stopping to water your horses, about you checking your maps,” the colonel added.  “About you wasting time while men were dying!” the colonel finished almost yelling.  The colonel swallowed and took a moment to regain his composure.
	“Major,” the colonel, said quietly.  “I would consider the issue of Patterson’s Creek settled if you would assist me in this matter,” he punctuated his request with a stern facial expression.
	There was another long silence between the two men. Neither man looked at the other. The afternoon light in the room had dimmed to darkness allowing the light of the lanterns to take affect.
	“You owe me.”
	“Owe you?”
	“Your lack of action cost me my arm and a lot of good men their lives!”
	“That action was review by headquarters! I was absolved.”
	“That was then. I wonder what headquarter would think now. I have been discussing the incident with some of the headquarters’ staff, and many of them are starting to see things my way.”
	“No new board of inquiry is going to reverse that decision. My orders were clear, and I followed them to the letter.”
	“No, but it might draw their scrutiny and drag you out from behind your men into the fight!”
	“Colonel, what are you suggesting?”
	“I’m suggesting that you help me.”
	“Or?”
	“Or major, one way or another you will pay for your dalliance two years ago. I needn’t remind you that I am still a fair shot on the field of honor, even with one arm.”
The major sat back in his chair. His angry expression melted away and changed to one of contemplation. After some contemplation, the major slowly nodded his head in agreement, and the colonel poured more brandy into the major’s cup.  He also filled his cup, put the bottle down, and lifted his cup almost as if to give a toast.  “Then we shall not speak of these things again,” he said then brought the cup to his mouth and drank.
*	*	*	*
	The men of Major Owen’s command stared at Lieutenant Colonel Martel as he rode into the major’s bivouac. This was not only because of the stature with which the colonel carried himself, but also both he and his horse were clean and well fed. He was a rare sight. His head was still held high, his movements were deliberate and without hesitation. Evident by the expression on his face, the thought of defeat was far from his mind. He still looked the confident predator they all once were, and the bright morning sun that shone behind him gave him a radiant glow. That was the view from the side with his remaining arm. The opposite side told a different story. The light breeze blew his hair away from his face exposing the scars and thinly veiled winces from pain. The sleeve of his uniform was pinned up revealing his amputated arm. Most of the troops that saw him gave him a quick glance and then looked away.  Those, whose glances lingered, were briefly teased by the twinge of hope that they all joyfully carried with them at the start of the war. Hope that, for them, time and reality had now corrupted.  He rode through the camp to its center where Major Owen had his tent.  The orderlies in front of the tent, Corporal Reed and Private Pierson, snapped to attention and both gave the colonel a crisp salute, which he returned. After the colonel dismounted, Private Pierson took the reins of the colonel’s mount, and Corporal Reed threw open the folds of the major’s tent and announced the colonel’s arrival.
	“Get Captains Meriwether and Brogan along with Lieutenant Perry and have them report to my tent. Also, get some fresh water and a bottle of my sipping whiskey,” the major said to Corporal Reed.  “Make sure the Colonel’s horse is properly tended to,” he barked after the orderly as the orderly walked away. “Lieutenant Colonel Martel,” the major said dropping the harshness from his voice as he turned to face the colonel and salute.  The colonel returned the salute and the major pulled the fold of the tent open wider and gestured his visitor to enter.
	Inside the tent, the colonel took the knapsack that he carried off his shoulder and put it on a chair by the table. He retrieved a map from the knapsack. With one arm, he tried to flatten it on the table before him. The major watched quietly for a moment before he spoke.
“May I assist you, colonel?” The major asked. The colonel looked up at the major as though the major had just insulted him. The colonel’s expression quickly softened.
“Yes, major you may.” The colonel replied and allowed the map to roll up into itself. “I am still getting used to dealing with my current situation. I’m sure you understand.”
The major stepped over to the table, unrolled the map, and secured its edges with weights.
“Drink?” The major asked when he finished with the map and looked at the colonel.
“Yes, I believe I will.” The colonel answered and sat down on one of the chairs around the table. The major stepped away from the table and retrieved a full bottle of whiskey and two glasses that sat on his desk. He carried them back to the table, filled the glasses and handed one to the colonel. The two men sipped their whiskey in silence.

The three junior officers entered the field tent worn and agitated. They saluted the two superior officers that sat at the table before them. Major Owen’s brow furrowed when he saw Captain Brogan’s ragged uniform.
“Captain Brogan, what is the meaning of this?”
“Major, the captain was in a wrestling match for the unit.” Lieutenant Perry said.
“Wrestling? Captain, you are a Confederate officer not some circus side show!”
“Sir, the captain was filling in for Sergeant Milne who’s down with a bout of malaria,” Captain Meriwether said.
“So you were there too, Captain Meriwether?”
“Sir, supplies are short. The quartermaster thought it best that we get together and each of the units wrestle for our allotment rather than someone going short and having to steal from the others. . . this way the matter is settled out in the open.”
“Still, I don’t like my officers looking like field hands.”
“Sir, he would have changed, but we were told you wanted to see us right away.”
“Captain Brogan, you will change when we are done here. You understand.”
“Yes sir.”
“Did you win?” The colonel asked.
“Yes sir, he sure did. He left the other man flat on his back,” the lieutenant said.
 The colonel and major’s whiskey glasses were half-full as was the whiskey bottle. The whiskey had softened the hard expressions of the two men from when they first met. The major gestured to the men to have a seat at the table, which colonel and he were already seated. There was a map on the table, and the junior officers took their seats slowly knowing that a map and two field officers could mean only one thing.
	“Drink?” the major asked the three men that had just arrived. They all nodded quietly as they shifted uncomfortably in their chairs. The major grabbed three large, not so clean shot glasses, filled them, and handed them to the men. The colonel sat at the table, silently studying the map.
	“Gentleman, Lieutenant Colonel Martel here has a task for us,” the major said. The backs of the captains stiffened when they heard the word task. The two captains looked at each other then turned their heads to look at the major. “The colonel here wants us to provide him a diversion,” the major continued as he moved around the table closer to the colonel and the area of the map that the colonel studied. 
	“I need to divert this Yankee regiment here,” the colonel, said pointing to a spot on the map. “I need them either drawn away,” he continued as he made a sweeping motion with his hand. “Or pinned down,” and placed his index finger on a particular spot on the map.
	“Major,” the Captain Meriwether said and then paused. “That’s not really our section of the line,”
	“It’s our far flank,” the major replied curtly. “The colonel’s cavalry has reconnoitered the area and has identified some soft spots where we can make a drive against the Yankees.”
	“Major Owen, there’s no need to take such a tone with your men about this,” the colonel said looking up from the map at the junior officers. “I just need them to see enough of the rabbit to set their dogs running,” he added and looked back down at the map.
	“Of course colonel,” the major replied.
	“My men spotted an artillery battery on the hill there,” he said pointing to a particular spot on the map. “That leaves them blind to a sudden mounted infantry attack from here or here,” the colonel continued pointing to various places on the map as he spoke. “With the sun on your back and wind in your face we could leave them running with their stew still in the pot.”
	The two junior officers sat back in their chairs and sighed apprehensively. The major studied the faces of the two men. He took a deep breath while he and the colonel waited for the two junior officers to respond.
	“Is there a problem?” the major asked.
	“No sir.” Captain Meriwether responded and paused. “We’re just wondering.”
	“Wondering . . . wondering about what,” the major asked tersely.
	“What these positions will look like tomorrow, sir. I mean, I assume that you will want us to move on these positions as soon as possible, and tomorrow is the earliest we could muster.”
	“Gentleman, let me be clear about this. What I asked the major for was a diversion. I only need the Yankees to look the other way briefly. Don’t be getting into some extended fray here.” 
	“Sir, you just want us to go up there and get them to look our way for a minute or two. Is that right?” Captain Brogan asked. The colonel nodded in response. “And break it off when?” Captain Brogan continued.
	“When my brigade of cavalry is across the bridge their guarding,”
	“How will we know you’re through?” Captain Meriwether asked. The colonel paused to think. After a minute, he pulled a compass out of his pocket and placed it on the table. He then oriented the map to the compass’ north and moved it closer to the positions that he had been pointing at earlier. His eyes darted from one point to another, as he spent a minute studying the map.
	“You won’t have to.” The colonel answered. “I’m just asking you to draw them off. They’ll come running after you this way.” The colonel pointed to a spot on the map. “And we’ll be coming at them from the opposite side.” 
	Captain Meriwether looked at the colonel with a quizzical expression.
	“Colonel, I still don’t see how. . .” 
	“Captain, have you ever heard the thunder of Confederate Cavalry?” The colonel, smiling contemptuously, asked Captain Meriwether.
	“I have.”
	“Then what is your concern?” The colonel asked as Captain Meriwether’s serious expression drained from his face.
	“Very well then colonel. You have your infantry support.” The major said. “Is there anything else?”
	“No.” The colonel replied breaking his stare with Captain Meriwether.
	“When were you planning to execute this raid?” The major asked.
	“As soon as you are ready. Tomorrow, if possible?”
	“Brogan, Meriwether, what do you think.” The major asked.
	The two captains searched the other’s face for an answer. Captain Brogan was first to nod in agreement. Captain Meriwether did not nod but turned his head away from the table and the map before he said, “I’m sure we could have the men ready by first thing tomorrow.”
	“Then it is agreed. Tomorrow, let us drink to it.” The major said as he started to lift his glass in the air. The other officers lifted their glass after him.
	“To scattered Yankees,” the colonel said grinning broadly.
*	*	*	*
	The treetops still filtered the morning sun when Corporal Reed, one of the major’s orderlies, approached Captain Brogan talking to the blacksmith by the corral. The corporal’s approach, announced by the crunch of crisp freshly fallen leaves, could be heard between the intermittent strikes of the blacksmiths hammer against an anvil. The Captain turned to face the corporal as the corporal came to a stop and saluted.
	“Captain, the major wants to see you,” Corporal Reed said dropping his salute.
	“Very well, tell him I’ll be along shortly,” the captain replied speaking over the slow rhythmic blows of the blacksmith’s hammer.
	“What?” Corporal Reed asked. Captain Brogan stepped closer to the corporal and leaned forward to talk into the corporal’s ear.
	“I’ll be there shortly,” the Captain repeated louder.
	“Sir, the major said right away, and I also have a message I’m delivering to Captain Meriwether. So I won’t be going right back.”
	Captain Brogan gave the corporal a sour expression before he saluted to dismiss him. The corporal quickly returned the salute and continued on his way. The captain moved off in the opposite direction toward the major’s tent. The crunch of the fall leaves became louder the further away he got from the corral and the sound of an anvil being slowly pummeled.
	As Captain Brogan approached the major’s tent, he was surprised to see the major seated outside. When the major saw the captain, he stood up, grabbed his cane, and walked toward him. The two men saluted each other when they met.
	“Walk with me captain; there is a matter that I wish to discuss.” The major said and then pivoted to set the direction of their walk.
	“Sir, wouldn’t it be easier to talk in your tent?” The captain asked following the major that had started off at a brisk pace.
	“I wanted to get some air captain.” 
	“Yes sir.” The captain replied as he stepped up his pace to keep abreast of the major. They walked away from the camp, beyond the sanitation trench, toward the wood line.
	“Captain, I want you to lead the attack tomorrow”
	“Why sir? Captain Meriwether is the senior officer.”
	“He seemed indecisive.”
	“Indecisive how? The colonel didn’t seem bothered by his questions.”
	“You don’t know the colonel like I do. I assured him that I would send someone who would do the job with no hesitation. That’s you.”
	“Yes, sir.”
	“I want you to start preparations immediately. And Brogan, keep this to yourself.”
	“Yes, sir.”
	“And Brogan, if you see Lieutenant Perry along the way, tell him that he’s to join me for supper in my tent.”
	“Yes, sir.” The captain said. He saluted the major and walked back toward the camp. The major continued on his walk.
