Chapter 9 – Byrne’s Fever
A young boy, no older than twelve, rode up to the church, stopped, and got off the horse as though he was late for his own wedding. He walked passed Luke and Joshua and went straight up to Cassie who was applying cold compresses to a feverish patient. The boy was agitated and quite put out when Cassie did not give him her undivided attention.
	“Where’s Doctor Pratt?” He asked a tired Cassie impatiently. When she did not respond he decided to tap her on the shoulder and asked again. She twitched her shoulder slightly in response to his tap and continued working. Seeing that his tap on the shoulder did not work, he reached out and grabbed her shoulder to try and turn her around. In response, Cassie, very quickly spun around and looked him directly in the eye with a look of anger rarely seen on her face. The boy, surprised, jerked his head back at the sudden movement and stared at her wide eyed.
	“Boy, don’t you bother me when I am working.” Cassie snarled at him and turned back around to tend her patient. The boy, put in his place, took off his hat and shifted his feet as he spoke.
	“Ma’am, can you tell me where Doctor Pratt is? I have a message for him from Colonel Lindsay.”
	“He’s in the surgery behind the curtain up near the choir box,” Cassie replied talking over her shoulder. Before she said any more, the boy had turned around and started up to where the doctor’s surgery was. Cassie turned to say something more to him as he left, but he moved to quickly. When the boy stepped around the curtain of the surgery, he stepped back the way he came, doubled over, with his hand over his mouth which quickly became covered with vomit. After his sudden vomit, he stood upright, turned white as a new sheet, and fainted. Cassie shook her head as the boy’s body hit the ground and turned her head toward the church door.
	“Luke, could you go get that boy and lay him out some place until he comes around.” Luke looked back at Cassie, nodded his head, and started walking toward the boy. “And clean up that mess he made before someone slips and breaks their neck.” She added.
	“Yes ma’am.” 
	Doctor Pratt, still blood spattered from surgery, stood over the boy when he woke. The doctor smiled at the boy as the boy’s eyes came to focus on him. 
	“How are you son?” the doctor asked.
	“Message,” the boy said faintly. “I have a message from Colonel Lindsay.”
	“Yes?”	
	“The army is moving and he would like you to follow.” The boy said gaining strength with each word.
	“I am to return with your reply,” the boy said as he slowly sat up. Doctor Pratt nodded his head.
	“Of course, I cannot speak for my staff, but I am sure we’ll manage.” He said to the boy. The boy turned to put his feet on the floor and was about to stand when the doctor put his hand on his shoulder to stop him.
	“Whoa, whatever you think you’re going to do can wait. You need to rest for a bit more.”
	“Can’t,” the boy said. “They were pulling up stakes when I left, and I was told to get right back with my answer or they might be gone by time I return.” The boy said to the doctor looking up at him imploringly. The doctor removed his hand from the boy’s shoulder and the boy stood up and headed straight back to his horse. “Colonel says you better be ready to move by dark or forget about following him. He told me to tell you that they’ll be moving fast.” The boy said over his shoulder and stepped out of the front door.
	Doctor Pratt looked around for Cassie and, spotting her, walked over to her. She was changing the dressing of a patient’s wound when the doctor walked up behind her.
	“I have to be moving on by dark. I hope that you will join me. It will not be anything pleasant but necessary.”
	Cassie looked up at the doctor as he spoke. The expression on her face became more serious with every word he spoke. “What about the men here?”
	“I will contact Pastor Grayson; he’ll know what to do. Besides, we’ve done all we can do here. All that’s left to be done is to redress wounds and spoon food into these men. Any darkie can do that. The rest is the will of God”
	Cassie took a moment to absorb the doctor’s words. “What should we bring with us? Most of our supplies and your instruments are all over the place here and nothing is clean”
	“Yes, have Josh and Luke gather them up and start cleaning them. We need to start packing to move immediately.”
	“Don’t you have more surgeries?” Cassie asked absentmindedly.
	“Yes, but nothing I think will do anymore good. If the colonel asks us to move with him we’ll be of more need with him than here. We have to make and stick to our priorities.” The doctor said and paused to stare off into the distance. “We’ve done our best here. It is time we move on to where our work can do the most good.”
	Cassie looked at the doctor and appeared as though she was about to cry. She took a deep breath before she spoke. “Yes doctor.” She stood up and immediately set about packing up their makeshift camp.
	Captain Brogan, being one of the walking wounded, was enlisted by Cassie to help to load the wagon with the doctor’s equipment and supplies. She had, after initially being intrigued by him, looked upon him with a degree of contempt. His running off with one of their horses significantly impacted their ability to retrieve the wounded. Her compassion for his condition had been stretched to its limit in trying to understand his motivations, and she no longer went out of her way to care for him. No other soldier had affected her like that. It made her uncomfortable, his ability to reach inside her beyond her capacity as a nurse. His actions made their relationship something beyond nurse and patient, and she had intentionally shoved aside the rest of her feelings to be a bottomless well of nursing compassion. She was now emotionally conflicted with Captain Brogan around. When she stepped out of the sanctuary, she was shocked to see the captain trying to lift a heavy table into the wagon by himself.
	“Captain, get the darkies to do that! The last thing we need is for you to make yourself any worse than you are.” She said to him from a distance. The captain was surprised by her outburst and lost his grip on the table. Cassie approached the wagon out of sorts. Standing behind him, he could hear her agitated breathing. He turned to face her.
	“I am just trying to make up for earlier,” he said.
	“You won’t make up for it by hurting yourself worse. I just wanted you to help because it is critically we get moving.”
	“Where are you going in such a hurry?”
	“What matter is it to you, captain?”
	“I’d like to go with you.”
	“Why!”
	“I am no longer of any use as a fighting man and I would like to do something to contribute and make amends for my behavior earlier.”
	“I appreciate your intentions, but what we do is not like fighting and I doubt you could contribute much to our cause.”
	“I’d like to try.” He said as she looked him over.
	“What do you know about tending the wounded?” She asked.
	“I will know what you teach me,” he responded.
	“I’ll talk to Doctor Pratt about it and see what he thinks.” She said and walked back into the church.

	The wagon was packed and weighed down with all the equipment that was needed to rebuild their hospital. The doctor stepped outside and looked up at the sky to judge the time of day. He wiped his brow with his sleeve and shook his head as he lowered it. Cassie stepped out of the church and stood behind the doctor.
	“What now,” Cassie asked looking up at the doctor quizzically.
	“I don’t like the idea of leaving this late to follow the army.” The doctor looked at Cassie thoughtfully. “Maybe we can use that captain after all.”
	“For what?”
	“He’s better with a gun than both of us and he’d also have a pretty good idea of how an army moves.”
	“I guess.”
	“He’d be better at it than any of us would and he’s right here asking to come along.” The doctor said looking at Cassie trying to determine what she was thinking. “I know he took the horse, but he also came back. As the war goes on, we may run into more and more men in his condition.”
	“Horse thieves?”
	“No broken men trying to fix themselves. Cassie you’ve got to understand that we are dealing with proud men who are having a hard time accepting a more and more likely future of living under Yankee rule.” The doctor paused. “They’ll blame themselves for not trying hard enough. I figure that’s what’s festering in the captain’s mind.” the doctor stopped again to think. “Giving him something to do like ride with us could be the best medicine we can provide.”
	Cassie inhaled deeply and held it. She slowly exhaled while the doctor studied her waiting for an answer. “This is all very hard for me.”
	“Why?”
	“Because he affects me and keeps me from focusing on my work.”
	“No one said that our support of the cause was going to be easy or comfortable, but if this man can helps us in our work then he should come with us. And you’ll just have to overlook whatever problem you have with him.” The doctor said giving her a long serious look.
	“Very well.”
	“Good. Have Josh put my tack on my horse and have the captain scout ahead for us.”

	The morning sun blinded them as they headed due east from Corinth directly into the jaws of the fight. The captain, after meeting up with Colonel Lindsay and his staff, now rode alongside the wagon that the doctor drove with Cassie seated next to him. He was told to be aware that there would be a Confederate force coming up on them from behind to reinforce their effort to dislodge the Yankees. They were told to stay a day’s ride behind the army’s main force and be ready to respond to any possibility. Except for small talk with Doctor Pratt, Cassie had been silent for three days. She ignored the captain as he rode alongside the wagon. The longer they rode the more awkward the silence became.
	“You’ve been mighty quite for quite some time.” Captain Brogan said after he turned his head to look at Cassie. Cassie did not respond. “Cassie, Miss Jefferson. You have been quiet for a while.” 
	“Cassie, the captain is talking to you.” Doctor Pratt said turning his head to speak directly into her ear. Cassie slowly turned her head to look at the captain.
	“Yes I have.”
	“May I ask why? I mean, I have seen you talk to the doctor on several occasions and I was thinking perhaps there was something we need to clear the air about.”
	“I do not believe so captain.”
	“So why won’t you talk to me?”
	“Because I have nothing to say.”
	“But that’s just what I mean. You should have something to say. We are going to be working together and I think it would be best if we had some sort of rapport”
	“A rapport? Why captain we do have a rapport. I am making every effort to hold my tongue not hurt your feelings. If I say something that hurt your feelings what sort of rapport would we have then?”
	“So you are still upset with me about what happened back at the church.”
	“I believe it showed poor judgment and was selfish. We have plenty enough of that and I do not see how you bringing such traits to work such as ours will make things any easier.” She said and turned her head forward to be blinded by the sun. The captain did not respond immediately.
	“I have my reasons for my behavior.”
	“Really?”
	“I am a gentleman and live by the gentleman’s code. When one does something dishonorable, or thinks it was something dishonorable, it is right and proper to make amends for that.”
	“By stealing a horse?”
	“I was going to return it.”
	“When, after you single handedly won the war? I hardly see the rationality of your thinking.”
	“I was wounded and not thinking clearly.”
	“I know you were wounded captain. We had many men in the church that were wounded. Only you snuck out in the middle of the night and stole our horse.”
	“Honor does not always present the clearest of paths in its resolution.”
	“I suppose that you are not alone when it comes to making that conclusion captain.” She said and turned her head and looked at him. “I hope that you and your kind can now see the unexpected results of such thinking.”
	“Well, it’s good to see that you two have broken the ice.” Doctor Pratt said as he snapped at the reins to encourage the horses to keep moving up the incline.
 *	*	*	*
	Captain Oden Byrne’s horse reared as he pulled on the horse reins to turn him around. The horse had other ideas about the current skirmish they were involved in. At this point in the war, it seemed that every encounter with the Union was an exercise in dealing with overwhelming numbers and firepower. Such situations did not deter the captain. Unlike Lieutenant Colonel Martel, who felt that he was performing the will of God, Captain Byrne’s motivation was purely and simply a rabid hatred of the North and Yankee’s. He was in full revolt against anyone who was going to tell him what to do. His fiery red hair and propane blue eyes gave visual notice that he was to be approached with caution.
	When the horse’s hooves hit the ground and it reluctantly turned around, he scanned the ground behind him expecting to see the rest of his cavalry company. What he saw was an open field full of saddled horses without riders. He glowered and swore calling the company of soldiers that rode into battle with him every kind of coward that existed in his vocabulary. When he saw a few saddled soldiers riding off into a stand of trees, he spurred his horse forward and chased them down. 
	Cutting across their path, he had unsheathed his sword and made ready to fight the four men he encountered. The men were caught completely unaware, but knew their ride to safety was over when they recognized the face at the end of the sword.
	“Gentleman, the enemy is that way,” the captain said in an instructional tone.
	“Captain it’s just us!” Young Lieutenant Andrews responded. “I’d like to have better odds when I go into a fight.”
	“It’s that kind of cowardice that is the reason why we they’ve made it this far.” The captain said glaring at the lieutenant. “We must teach them that we are fearless. That we will rain down on them like brimstone. When they know that they will meet this kind of resistance everywhere they go, they will be less likely to move against us.”
	“Five men with pistols riding up against their repeating rifles, captain it will only take one of them with good aim to send us all to our maker.” Sergeant Wilkins said anxious to turn his horse and ride away.
	“I’ll have the head of the first man who moves any further toward the rear. We must bear down on them again, and again, and again until they see the depth of our resolve. Running is not an answer.” The captain responded as his horse jerked and twisted beneath him. “Who is with me?”
	The unexpected appearance of Union infantry made the decision for them. They all spurred their horses to put some distance between them and the attacking force. They rode toward a wooden fence that spanned the large field on which they fought. Minutes before, it was crowded with Union troops which decimated their formation, but now, they seemed to have moved and the fence was sparsely defended. The captain, realizing their change in fortune let out a rebel yell as the men galloped across the field. His elation was premature. The sergeant was correct in his earlier assessment. A single Union soldier steadied himself against the fence, and shot them out of their saddle one at a time. The captain was not aware of what was happening until he could see Sergeant Wilkins, who rode next to him, fall from his saddle and hit the ground. The captain pulled at the reins to slow and turn his horse. He rode up on the sergeant quickly who had somehow managed to get to his knees. The captain snatched his comrade up and pulled him on the saddle while the Union soldiers shot at them. The captain rode past the other men who lay dead or dying on the field. The captain was now angrier than ever and his only thought was to get back to his headquarters to get another command that he could lead into battle. Out of shooting distance, the captain slowed his horse and the two men headed for where they hoped they would find help. Much to the captain’s annoyance, the sergeant bled on the captain’s uniform. He couldn’t help but think how unpresentable he would appear with a dying man hanging on to him.
They rode along slowly, and the sergeant’s blood began to soak through his uniform so the captain could feel it against his skin. He found it uncomfortable and was tempted to leave the sergeant leaning against a tree but thought better of it.
	A wagon load of wounded drew Captain Byrne’s attention to a distant plantation manor house. It appeared to be derelict, but the activity going on around it suggested otherwise. He turned his horse and head toward the house. The injured man that he carried was barely conscious his grip on the captain’s back became more tenuous by the minute. It was a burden that the captain was anxious to free himself from. Finally, the sergeant was unconscious and became the dead weight that he was perceived to be. Exhaustion crept up on Captain Byrne too. The two men passed a barn that had been looted and was now used to house the wounded. The smell from it acted as a smelling salt bringing the drowsy cavalryman back to full consciousness. The entire area was abuzz with activity slaves unloading the wounded and placing them on stretchers, civilians kneeling over soldiers giving comfort and a physician in a bloody apron giving orders. It was the last thing that Captain Byrne remembered before he passed out.
	The two men on horseback were ignored until they both slid off and fell to the ground. Cassie yelled to a slave to put the two men on stretchers and see to the horse. It was another hour before someone got around to tending to the two men. The sergeant had died, but Captain Byrne was still alive and just need a flesh wound stitched up. Doctor Pratt had long since delegated such tasks to Cassie and Captain Brogan. They, in turn, were kept busy with sewing up the wounded rarely taking the time to wash up between procedures doing what they could as quickly as they could then hoping for the best. Such was the fate of Captain Byrne. The enmity between Cassie and Captain Brogan had long since dissipated in the weeks that had passed after they set up shop outside of Athens Georgia. They had become two links in chain used to pull the dying from the jaws of death.
	The steady stream of injured was a clear signal that things were not going well for their cause. On several occasions it was rumored that they may have to relocate or even be overrun by Union forces. It was cause for concern. Especially since, at times, gun and cannon fire was so close that voice had to be raised to be heard and the smell of gunpowder would permeate the area around the manor house. It distracted soldier and caregiver alike. The soldiers felt vulnerable being caught without their weapons. The caregivers feared being prevented from giving care to soldiers that fought for their cause. In the meantime, the flow of wounded continued as did the efforts of those who cared for them.
