Chapter 15 – Cassie Gets a Gun
Cassie was working in the kitchen when she saw a man approaching the house from the road. She stepped out of the house to meet him.
“Afternoon, ma’am.” Edward Riley said.
“Good afternoon. Can I help you?” Cassie asked.
“Yes, ma’am. The name is Riley, Edward Riley and I was wondering if you could provide a drink of water for weary traveler.” Edward Riley asked.
“I suppose so.” Cassie said and they walk to the well pump on the side of the barn. She pumped the handle as he soaked his head in the flow of water from the pump.
“You folks live here long?” Edward Riley asked after he pulled his head out from under the pump and shook it dry.
“Not too, long. But we’re settling in. What about you? We don’t get many lone travelers in these parts.” Cassie said.
“Me, I am just a man on my own. I kind of lost everything during the war. The Yankee’s burned me out.” Edward Riley said and then took the ladle off its hook and had a drink.
“Oh, dear Lord, you’re not alone. You must be tired and hungry. Why don’t you come up to the house and sit awhile. I’ll fix you a little something.” Cassie offered.
“Thank you, no ma’am. Water is fine, but it sure is nice to be offered some good old southern hospitality.”
“The people around here are kind enough. I am sure any one of them would be more than willing to share what they had with you if you asked.”
“To be honest with you ma’am, I am more than just a drifter. You might say that I am loosely associated with the people those Yankee’s are looking for.” 
“You’re a . . .”
“Patriot, ma’am.” Edward Riley said finishing her sentence. He pumped the handle again and filled the ladle with more water and drank.
“You’re one of those men causing all this trouble.”
“We just feel that the issue hasn’t been settled yet. But that’s not why I am here. You and your husband have been a great help to our cause.”
“Really, in what way?”
“The two of you have managed to keep the Yankee’s tied up here for weeks. We’ve been watching them watching you. You’ve been more help to us than a brigade of regulars.”
“That was not our intention.”
“I understand ma’am. We have to be moving on now, and we thought it would be only decent if we thanked you and at least offered something in return for your trouble.”
“Your leaving would be enough.”
“I thought my boy help you with some of your chores tomorrow. These chores aren’t decent work for a woman like you.”
“It’s honest work. I’ve done worse.”
“We have our work to do too, and I’d rather not bring him along. You’d be doing both of us a favor if you could take him for the day.”
“You men and your work, when are you all going to end this? And what do I tell my husband. We don’t keep secrets from each other.”
“Well ma’am, I was hoping you’d be thinking more about the boy.”
“What happens if you don’t come back from your work?” 
“He knows what to do. He’ll only be a bother to you for the day.”
“I feel as though you are trying to draw me into something that I should avoid.” Cassie said with a suspicious tone to her voice and narrowed eyelids.
“No, ma’am, if it was like that, we could have made them Yankee’s quite a bit more suspicious. It is as I say it is.”
“Alright.” Cassie said and watched as Edward Riley filled the ladle, and took one last drink before he walked away.
“You’ll see ma’am. He’s a real good boy. No trouble at all and thank you for the water.” Edward Riley said behind him.
*	*	*	*
Cassie was outside by the barn when a 14-year-old boy approached her. She was filling a bucket full of water at the pump on the side of the Barn.
“Mrs. Brogan? My daddy sent me over to help you.” Parker Riley said.
Cassie stopped and looked Parker over.
“How long have you been running around with your Father?” Cassie asked.
“Since near the end of the war.”
“What’s your name?” Cassie asked as she continued to look him over.
“Parker.”
“Well Parker, we already have enough scarecrows around here. You come on up to the house and let gets some food in you.”
Cassie sat across from Parker and watched him as he voraciously ate the plate of she made for him.
“So, Parker how do you and your daddy get along.” Cassie asked as she watched him eat.
“It was tough at first, but my daddy has friends now.” Parker replied between mouthfuls.
“Don’t you want home that you can go to?”
“My daddy says the Yankees burned down the only home that we ever wanted.”
“So you’re going to live the rest your life in the wilderness?”
“My daddy says the day you let another man beat you down is the day that you become their slave.”
“Did your daddy own slaves before the war?”
“He worked as an overseer.”
“Oh, are you done or do you want more?”
“More please.” Parker said and Cassie got up, filled another plate, and handed it back to him. “This is real good of you Mrs. Brogan.” Parker said before he started shoveling food from the plate in his mouth again.
“Slave or man, I don’t work scarecrows. What are you doing for schooling?” Cassie asked as she sat back down at the table watching him.
“My daddy says that I am learning all I need to know riding with him and his friends.” Parker said after he took a moment to chew enough food so he could speak. They both stopped to listen to the rapid approach of several horses.
“You stay here.” Cassie said and she got up and went to her kitchen window to see who had arrived.
“My daddy said you might need this sooner than later.” Parker said to Cassie who turned around to see him as he reached under his shirt and pulled out a revolver.
“Put that thing away.” Cassie said.
“You’re going to go out their unarmed? They might be Yankees.” Parker said.
“Someday you and your kin are going to realize that the war is over.” Cassie said.
“Where do you want me to put this?” Parker asked holding the gun up ready to hand it to her.
“Put it in the cupboard for now. We’ll get rid of it later.” Cassie said as she looked out the kitchen window.  She quickly walked over to the door to step out and greet the new arrivals.
“Stay here, and be quiet.” Cassie said before she opened the door and stepped outside.
Just outside the kitchen door five Union soldiers on panting and snorting horses confronted Cassie. The soldiers were disheveled and drunk. It was Sergeant Pinket and his men.
“Can I help you?” Cassie asked.
“Are you Brogan’s woman?” Sergeant Pinket asked in a drunken sneer as he swayed unsteadily on his horse.
“No, I am his wife. What business do you have here?” Cassie asked.
“We’re here to give Brogan a message.” Sergeant Pinket said.
“None of you appears to be in any condition to give either me or my husband anything.” Cassie said as she surveyed the soldiers in front of her.
Sergeant Pinket looked around at his men. “Well boys, it looks like we got ourselves a lively one.” The men laughed at his comment.
“Your Captain Noonan was here the other day and told us that he gave orders for us to be left alone, but I guess Yankees like you tend to be a little weak in the head after you have had a drink or two.” Cassie said in a scolding tone with her hands on her hips.
Sergeant Pinket spat a wad of chewing tobacco that landed near Cassie’s feet.
“You see that. That’s what I think of his orders.” Sergeant Pinket said.
“It’s my understanding that soldiers follow orders otherwise, they’re just rabble. No better than the renegades that they’re chasing. Is that true?” She added in a contemptuous tone.
“You ought to know not to speak like that to me. If you want, I can get off this horse and put that passion of yours to good use.” Sergeant Pinket said and slipped in his saddle almost falling off.
“A man like you is of no interest to me. Although, we do have an amorous sow in the pigpen, but it’s my understanding that she’s a bit particular, too.” Cassie said.
“Sergeant, Tillman’s patrol is right behind us. We need to get out of here if we’re going to make camp before him.” Pinket crony Private Morse said in a clearly anxious tone.
“You tell your husband to keep looking over his shoulder. The captain might be done with him, but I’m not. You’re all stubborn rebel scum and I. . .” Sergeant Pinket said.
“Sarge, I think we better go, now.” Private Morse said emphatically.
Sergeant Pinket looked back and forth at his crony and Cassie a couple of times. He reined his horse around and galloped off followed by his men. Cassie waited until they were off the property before she went back inside the house.

The sun was falling behind the trees as the community of men worked anxiously to finish raising a barn on Pastor Goodwin’s farm. John Brogan manned a winch with a rope that was tied to the frame of a side of a barn. He struggled to hold the winch in place as the men around him applied some modifications to the frame before they all would make the final effort to lift it into place. It was in the midst of John Brogan’s red faced effort that Peter rode up on horseback. He jumped off the horse and ran up to John Brogan.
“Mr. Brogan, Mr. Brogan! There are soldiers at your house arguing with your wife!” Peter said. John Brogan looked at Peter while he struggled with holding the winch in place.
“What?” John Brogan asked.
“There are soldiers at your house!” Peter said.
John Brogan locked the winch in place and looked around for a horse. The men that were working on the frame realized that John Brogan was no longer keeping the rope that held the frame taught as it moved around. Deputy Williams ran over to the winch.
“What’s the problem John?” Deputy Williams asked.
“There are soldiers on his farm.” Peter said.
“I need a horse. Can I use yours?” John Brogan asked.
“Sure, it’s the brown one over there tied to the fence.” Deputy Williams replied.
Deputy Williams pointed toward his horse.
“Thanks!” John Brogan said before he ran off toward the deputy’s horse.
“Brogan, Brogan!” Deputy William shouted after him. Deputy Williams started working the winch while he watched John Brogan mount his horse and gallop away.
“What’s the matter deputy?” Peter said as they deputy grimaced.
“I was going to tell him to leave my rifle. I wouldn’t want any shooting going on.” Deputy Williams said. The two watched John Brogan gallop away out of sight.
“Here, boy, grab one of these handles and help me with this.” Deputy William said pulling the young man toward him.

On the trail between the two farms, John Brogan noticed the holstered rifle attached to the saddle as he rode toward his farm at a gallop. He groped for the rifle to have it in hand when he arrived home. The ride was too rough and he had to slow to a fast trot in order to get the rifle and check to see if it was loaded. With the rifle in one hand and the horse’s reins in the other, he urged the horse back to a full gallop. In the distance, he saw the silhouette of his farm in the fading light. He also saw torches. He urged the horse off the road. They jumped the fence and rode across the plowed field toward the house.
It was near dark on a moonless night. Cassie stood alone confronted by the soldiers just outside the door of the farmhouse. Sergeant Pinket and his men were on their horses between her and the barn.
“He’s not here. No one is here but me!” She said.
“If he’s not here, where is he?” Sergeant Pinket asked sounding less intoxicated and meaner than he was earlier that afternoon.
“I don’t know. He said he’d be home around sunset.” Cassie said sensing that she was in real trouble but trying to hide her concern.
“And he left you here all alone. I don’t believe you.” Sergeant Pinket replied.
“I don’t care if you don’t believe me.” Cassie said channeling her fear to anger that was reflected in her tone of voice.
“All you rebels are liars and only understand one thing.” Sergeant Pinket said and motioned to his man with the torch toward the barn.
“No!” Cassie said as she moved hesitantly unsure of whether to stop the man with the torch or stay between the soldiers and the farmhouse.
“Maybe he’s hiding in there.” Sergeant Pinket said as he moved his horse toward the house. A shot was fired from an open window.
“You leave her alone you Yankee scum!” Parker yelled from one of the farmhouse windows. The soldiers returned fire. Cassie ran back into the house through the kitchen door.
“Parker, Parker!” Cassie said as she moved through the dark house looking for her young guest.
Outside, between the barn and the farm house Sergeant Pinket’s horse reared. He turned to his man with the torch.
“Burn it. Burn it all!” Sergeant Pinket snarled and made a broad movement with his free hand. The man with the torch set the dry grass around the barn on fire. Parker shot at the man setting the fire. Sergeant Pinket’s men returned fire and now knew which window to shoot at.
Cassie walked into the bedroom that was lit only by the light of the burning barn and saw Parker with the gun that he had earlier. His face illuminated by the fire as he stirred near the window. Gunshots peppered the window while he squatted down to reload the revolver.
“Parker, Parker! No!” Cassie cried as she tried to get closer to Parker while avoid being shot. Parker finished loading the revolver. He stood up to shoot but he was fatally wounded from the gunfire that came from outside. He fell back on the Brogan’s bed and died. The soldiers outside kept shooting as Cassie scrambled over to Parker’s body. They continued to shoot even as Cassie embraced Parker with her face buried in his chest, not returning their fire. Cassie looked down and over to the window and saw the revolver on the floor. She lifted Parker’s legs onto the bed and then went back to the window and picked up the revolver. Cassie started shooting at the soldiers from the window.
John Brogan, as he rode across his own field in the dark again heard gunfire and spurred his horse. Close enough to shoot, He stopped his horse, took careful aim, and hit one of the soldiers in front of the farmhouse. He saw the soldier he shot fall from his horse and he then spurred his horse on closer to the farmhouse.
Still outside the Brogan farmhouse, the soldiers were confused by the unexpected gunfire, and reined their horses around in different directions to see where it came from. Another shot was fired from the house and the soldiers started firing at the house again.
John Brogan, finally close enough to see the soldiers clearly, stopped his horse and got off.  The soldiers continued shooting at the farmhouse. Once more, he took aim and shot another soldier off his mount, and once more the soldiers and their horses shift around confused by the new gunfire. Sergeant Pinket looked around and signaled the other soldiers to leave. The sergeant and two other soldiers rode off into the safety of darkness.

