Chapter 18 – On the Town
	With work came play and the ranch hands at Sundgren’s Ranch lived no differently. Monthly, each hand was given a weekend off from their duties on the ranch. It was also the weekend they were paid. It was expected that the hands would go into town and spend their money on the diversions that existed there. This situation satisfied an unwritten agreement between the town father’s and the ranchers regarding keeping money that the hands spent local.
The Gold Bar Saloon, where Brogan and Sundgren initially met, was a two story rectangular structure that sat near the center of town and directly across from the sheriff’s office. On the first floor was a bar that stretched almost the entire length of the building’s long side. The entrance on the building’s narrow side that faced the street had a vestibule. The vestibule provided a buffer for those inside from those who entered and exited the building during bad weather. Once in the saloon, the bar was to the left with the rest of the room being tables for all sorts of gambling, primarily card games but there was also roulette. At the far end of the room opposite the vestibule was a small stage. On the right side, about half the distance of the room was a stairway that provided access to the second floor and a variety of rooms for private activities. The bar itself was walnut that had ornate carvings decorating its corners. Behind the bar was kept a variety of liquors that were accented by a wall that had highly polished brass plates. The brass plates were intricately engraved in places, but mainly functioned as a reflective surface to increase the depth of the room. A series of chandeliers hung from the ceiling and provided a great deal of light.
That fall night the weather was unusually warm. The ceiling fans spun above the crowd that filled bar, and the windows that faced the street were open. One corner of the room was set up for just drinking. The three tables in this area were occupied. Saloon girls walked about the room. Some hung on to gamblers while others plied drinks to anyone in the room. The three bartenders that worked the room were very busy. The ranch hands from Sundgren’s ranch walked into the bar excited and anxious. Their pockets full of coins and they looked around for ways to spend it. They did not have to look far. Most of the ranch hands headed for either a saloon girl or gambling table that caught their fancy. Brogan walked over to the bar alone. He put a gold piece on the bar to get the bartender’s attention. It took a moment for the bartender to reach him.
“What can I get you?” The bartender asked.
“Whiskey.” Brogan said. “ Leave the bottle.” The bartender put a full bottle of whiskey and a shot glass down in front of Brogan and he started drinking. He downed one shot after another in a hurry to reach oblivion. Sara one of the saloon girls watched Brogan as he drank. She put on her most inviting expression before she walked up to him and squeezed in next to him showing him her ample cleavage.
“You could at least let a girl pour it for you.” Sara said and reached for the bottle, but Brogan grabbed her wrist and held it tightly. He looked her over. “Here.” Brogan said and dropped a large silver coin on the bar. “You tell all your frilly dressed friends that there is no sale here. Don’t bother me; don’t come near me, none of you. You hear?”
“I hear.” Sara said and pulled her hand free. “You didn’t have to be so rough.” She added before she picked up the coin and walked away rubbing her wrist. Brogan went back to drinking. From his corner of the bar he watched the rest of the ranch hands drink, gamble, and whore until he forgot who and where he was.

It was winter, but an unusual thaw left the roads icy but clear enough for the men to ride into town on their free weekend. The saloon was full. The Bar was busy. Saloon girls worked the room plying themselves and drinks from the bar. The ranch hands from Sundgren’s ranch walked in the bar as they usually did. Once inside, they took off their winter coats and, like a of migrant animals, headed for either a saloon girl or gambling table. Brogan broke off from the group and again walked over to the bar. This time a bottle of whiskey and shot glass was waiting for him. He picked it up and walked over to a table where he sat and drank it. He drank to put out the searing thoughts that bothered him. Being free from hunting and killing other men there was nothing to fill his mind but memories of the life that he left behind. The thoughts he had were triggered by the smallest things, things like the smell of a woman, or the sight of her wrist when she poured a drink, or the rustle of her dress. Brogan thought that the only thing worse than going to town was to sit in an empty bunk house with the howling wind blowing against its walls making them creak. The emptiness and noise of the bunkhouse could stir many ghosts with no place to hide from them. Alcohol and isolation seemed his only alternative. At the saloon the ranch hands watched over him, and when he got so drunk that he passed out, they would take him up to one of the private rooms with a bed and leave him to sleep it off. When it was time to leave they would rouse him if it was needed.

It was spring. The boots of the ranch hands were muddy even though they scraped the bulk of the mud off. They wore rain slickers over their medium weight spring coats. Again, the saloon was full, the bar was busy, and the Saloon girls worked the room. The ranch hands from Sundgren’s ranch walked into the bar. They headed for either a saloon girl or gambling table. Brogan walked over to the table where he usually sat. This time a bottle of whiskey and a shot glass sat at an empty table. He walked over to the table sat down and started drinking. Drusilla, one of the new saloon girls, gave the piano player some money. He got up from the piano to let her play as she played she began to sing. She played and sang very well. Brogan, entranced, walked over to introduce himself as soon as she finished. A crowd of men formed around her, but she moved toward Brogan having eyed him from the moment he split off from the group of ranch hands that he walked in with.
“You sing beautifully. That voice. I haven’t heard one like it in a long time. What’s your name?” Brogan asked as tears welled up in his eyes. He studied her face and body fascinated by the similarity she had with Cassie. Drusilla moved closer to Brogan. 
From a distance she may have resembled Cassie, but close up there was no comparison. Drusilla was physically worn from a hard life of drink and prostitution. The clothes she wore were ragged and she preferred it that way. She had dark circles under her eyes that were half natural and half from the make-up she liked to wear. The other saloon girls loathed her. She was a savage among the savage. She was a short tempered mean drunk and stole from everyone she met. Such was her behavior on good days; on her bad days she had the temperament of a rabid bobcat clawing at everyone who came near and staring at others with eyes filled with irrational fear.
“The other girls warned me to stay away from you.” Drusilla said as she looked Brogan over pleased with what she saw.
“You’re not like the other girls.” Brogan said.
Drusilla put her hands on her hips. “No, but you might want to be careful all the same.” Drusilla replied coyly.
“Can I touch you? Put my arms around you?” Brogan asked acting as though she were fragile and might break.
“Sure, but it will cost you, and no rough stuff.”
“Anything, I would especially like to hear you sing again, but not here.”
“Okay.” She looked him over from the chest down to his waist. “I bet all that money in your pockets weighs you down.” Drusilla said sounding as though she was about to drool.
“I don’t keep it all on me.”
“I bet you don’t. Why don’t we go upstairs so we can talk in private? My name is Drusilla, Drusilla Poignard.” She said and put her hand in his, turned, and started leading him toward the stairs. Jarrett, seeing Brogan and Drusilla headed upstairs, got up from his card table to intercept them.
“No, Brogan, not that one. You don’t want that one!” Jarrett said and followed them as they started climbing the stairs.
“He’s made his choice. Go back to your game and leave us alone.” Drusilla said in a shrill snarl.
“She’ll be the death of you Brogan! The death!” Jarrett said clearly agitated. Drusilla and John Brogan ignore him. They entered a room and closed the door. Jarrett went back to his card game.
In her room she turned up the oil lamp to a brightness that allowed the detail of their faces to be seen, but not so bright as to be able to read. Drusilla took off her dress and let it fall to the floor. Underneath she wore only a corset. In the subdued light, with her scars hidden, she appeared quite seductive. She began singing as she walked over to the bed where John Brogan had sat down. She sang just loud enough to be heard in the confines of the room and especially by her new found customer. Standing in front of Brogan she continued her gentle song and massaged Brogan as she undressed him. Naked to his waist, she slowly pushed him back on the bed. He rolled over on his stomach and she continued her massage searching the floor for the piece of clothing where he kept his money. As she continued he began to drift off to a long desired deep sleep. 
Outside of the room there were those who were desirous to hear what was going on between Brogan and his new found songbird. The noise in the public area of the bar went strangely quiet. It was so quiet that Drusilla’s singing could be heard by some in the saloon’s public area. Some of those that listened couldn’t help but laugh, the saloon girls in particular. They had no love for Brogan and felt that the two deserved each other.
*	*	*	*
There were still large patches of snow that covered the range as John Brogan and Jarrett rode Sundgren’s range looking for rustlers, breaks in the fence, and dead cattle. Brogan was so successful at discouraging rustlers that there were very few rustlers skilled enough to cross Sundgren’s range and live. His exploits removed one more hazard from the ranch hands work. They all, some grudgingly, respected and appreciated him.
“How can you be interested in her and hate all the rest?” Jarrett asked as he closed his eyes and lifted his head to bask his face in the sun.
“I’m not. I just like to hear her sing.” Brogan replied.
“I like a woman with a beautiful voice too, but I don’t take her upstairs to be alone with her.”
“My dealings with her are my business.” Brogan snapped.
“She’s our business. When we are out here alone, we have to depend on each other.” Jarrett replied in an unexpected sharp tone.
“So?”
“So, before you were always here with us. When we weren’t thinking, you were. But now, we don’t know where you are.”
“I’m still here.”
“Are you? Or, are you in town with her? I bet you’re thinking about her now. I liked the old Brogan better, quiet but trustworthy.” Jarrett said clearly irritated by Brogan’s answer and spurred his horse off at a gallop down to a nearby creek. There, his horse drank.
Jarrett was correct in his assumption about where Brogan’s thoughts were. Even though it was only two days since they left town, Brogan felt as though he would burst if he did not see and hear her again before sundown. He didn’t even signal to Jarrett his intentions. He just turned his horse and rode into town. He stopped in front of the Gold Bar Saloon and tethered his horse.
Brogan entered the saloon. It was mid afternoon and the saloon was almost empty. Saloon girls talked to the bartender, sat at empty tables talking to each other, and the lucky ones hung off the shoulders of the few card players and men at the roulette wheel. John Brogan walked over to the bartender and asked him a question. It was the question: where was she. The bartender responded by pointing to one of the rooms upstairs. Brogan started walking in the direction of the room that was pointed out to him. He climbed the stairs approaching the room moving slower with every step. He listened at the door before he knocked. He heard the laughter of Drusilla and another man. Brogan knocked at the door.
“Drusilla? Drusilla, it’s me John.” Brogan said through the door. He could hear her cackle.
“What do you want? I’m busy, can’t you tell?” Drusilla replied.
“Busy?” John Brogan asked in an absurdly innocent tone. He heard Drusilla cackle again.
“Go away! Come back when I’m free.” Drusilla replied in a suggestive tone.
John Brogan turned to look back at the patrons in the bar. Some of them stared back at him.
“Dru?” John Brogan said.
“Go away. I’m busy.” Drusilla replied. She cackled again and the laughter of a man followed.
“Not too busy for me!” John Brogan snapped. Brogan stepped back to the balustrade, drew his revolver, and kicked the door open. Inside the room, both Drusilla and the man that she was with were half-naked. There was a bottle of whiskey on the table. The man in the room rolled off the bed on to the floor. Drusilla, wearing only a corset, walked toward John Brogan as though she was cornering a disobedient dog.
“What the hell is the matter with you?” Drusilla said standing in front of him. She attempted to slap him, but Brogan caught her wrist in his free hand and backhanded her with his other hand that also held the gun. She fell backward landing on the bed. She stood up. Blood started to ooze from the side of her mouth.
“Bastard!” Drusilla snarled viciously.
John Brogan started to walk further into the room to get at the man hiding behind the bed.
Drusilla reached under the mattress and pulled out a knife. She grasped it by the handle ready to throw.
“Get the hell out! I don’t need you disturbing my customers!” She screamed.
John Brogan was about to get the customer in view when the customer stood up. He was clothed only in underwear from the waist down.
“Mister, I don’t know who you are, but I am only here for some fun. I didn’t know it was like this between you two!” the customer pleaded.
Brogan took another step toward the customer. Drusilla threw the knife. Brogan jerked his upper body back and the knife just missed him landing in the wall behind him. Brogan took another step toward the bed. Drusilla leapt off the bed and onto Brogan. He was knocked off balance from the unexpected attack. While the two fought, the customer grabbed what clothes he could, scampered toward the door, and out the room. Brogan started to spin around, but Drusilla held fast to his upper body and started biting at his neck and chest. He started to pistol-whip her. She fell off after a couple of well-placed blows. A dazed Drusilla crawled, on her knees, to her carpetbag and pulled out a buggy whip. Brogan started to tend to his bleeding bites. Distracted, Brogan didn’t see Drusilla stand up. She quickly spun around and lashed Brogan in the side with the whip. The lash of the whip knocked Brogan sideways into the far wall of the room. He dropped the revolver and slowly crumpled to the floor. Drusilla cackled.
“I have to teach you like all the others!” Drusilla said before she lashed Brogan again as he started to stand up. This lash landed on his arm that he held up to protect himself. Brogan turned his body and lunged at Drusilla as she drew back to deliver another lash from the whip.  She then spun around and backed away. He missed grabbing her. Drusilla delivered a lash from behind that landed on his neck and side of his face. Brogan’s hands covered his face, and he just missed grabbing the whip. Blind with rage Brogan turned around and started walking toward Drusilla.
“Haven’t had enough, huh?” Drusilla said. She delivered another lash to his mid-section. Brogan anticipated her action and reacted by grabbing the whip and yanking as hard as he could. The force of Brogan’s yank pulled her toward him, through the room’s door, over the balustrade. She landed on the roulette table and was impaled on the roulette wheel. Brogan crumpled to the floor exhausted and in pain. Deputy Farnsworth and a bartender walked into the room stood over Brogan.
“Figures I’d see you after awhile. Your type always ends up in irons.” Deputy Farnsworth said.
“You’ll have to pay for the mess you made.” The bartender added.
“And the sheriff don’t like people killing his whores unless he tells them to.” The deputy said. The two men reached down, picked Brogan up by his arms, and dragged him out of the room and off to jail.
