Chapter 7 – The Undying Debt of Honor
	An early afternoon sun found its way through the holes in the roof of the small wood frame church. Sun beams illuminated its interior giving it, in some places, a sense of reverence. It also exposed the dust and dirt that was suspended in the air and collected in the unused spots within the sancturary. Stagnant air trapped the smell in the shelter. It had become a make shift hospital for confederate soldiers and was filled with those lucky enough to get pulled from the battlefield for medical treatment. The air reeked of death, sweat, and urine. There was also the constant groaning of those in pain, hacking and intermittent coughs, the cries of the delirious along with those in pain, and the desperate pleas of the dying as they used up the last of their emotional strength. All that could be done to ease the suffering was being done. The injured were strewn about the floor and pews of the church. Buckets of fresh water were brought in and rounds were made to satisfy the thirsty; there was the operating room where Doctor Silas Pratt worked to stem the tide of suffering. The war was never far. Cannon and gun fire was always near enough to be heard. It unnerved soldier, physician and attendant alike with the constant reminder that the suffering continued.
	Exhausted, Cassie Jefferson stepped through the front door of the church and sat down on the stairs at the front of the church. She took deep breaths of the plentiful fresh air outside of the church. She rested an elbow on her knee and her forehead in her hand. The fresh air amplified the ever present fatigue that she felt as she worked to nurse the soldiers back to health and assist Doctor Pratt in any way she could.  The sounds of the battlefield, like some distant macabre symphony, rose and fell. At that moment, there was a lull in the fighting and Cassie drifted closer and closer toward sleep. She did not hear Doctor Pratt as he walked out of the church and sat next to her on the stairs. As her head slipped from the grip of her hand she awoke with a start and looked to see who had sat down next to her.
“I’m sorry Doctor Pratt. I just had to come out and get some air. Those poor souls, their suffering weighs on my heart.” She said as she gazed at him still surprised by his seemingly sudden appearance.
 “Your efforts here have soothed the suffering of many. I just hope that the stream of twisted and broken bodies has slowed for now. Some rest would do both of us a world of good.”
Cassie nodded in agreement and looked around the grounds of the church. It was set in a meadow with wind break of trees on either side. The grass had grown tall during the summer and had now become golden stems of straw. Birds, butterflies, and various other flying insects went about their business in the afternoon sun. With the brief quiet, the view of the field and trees had become idyllic. In the background, the slaves could be heard singing hymns as they worked.
 “I have missed the South.” Cassie said thinking out loud. Her comment caught the doctor off guard as he too was starting to fall asleep.
“Pardon?” The doctor asked forcing himself awake.
 “I miss the South, even when I was in Paris studying music and painting, reading literature and philosophy, and having grand conversations over coffee by the Seine. My home was never far from my heart.
 “Why would you return knowing there was war?
“The letters I received from home. At first, they were cheery, but then their tone changed, and I started to worry. What was said in the letters did not match what I was reading in the papers.”
 “You read about the sieges?”
 “That and the change in the tone of the letters I received. They had a despair to them. I sensed their hope fading like the dying light of a candle.”
 “Why come back to their despair?”
 “They are my family. I go as they go. By time I got to the plantation, all that was left was charred wood and a chimney. My brothers were scarred and broken by the war and my mother almost out of her mind with grief.”
 “I’m sorry.”
 “Don’t be. Stubborn proud men are the fuel that keeps the flame of this war burning. It’s what burned down my home.”
 “So what are you going to do now, I mean, after the war is over?
 “Start over. When this war is over, somewhere there will be a man with enough light left in his heart to make life worthwhile. I just hope that I don’t give in to despair like so many others.”
Their conversation was abruptly interrupted by the sound of a rapidly approaching buckboard. As it cleared the wind break of trees, they both could see that it was filled with injured and dying men. Doctor Pratt’s tired face was re-energized. He stood up and walked back into the church and returned with slaves to help him move the men into the church. The men are first pulled from the wagon and placed on the yard in front of the church. Doctor Pratt and Cassie go from injured man to injured man evaluating wounds and telling the slaves where to put the injured and dying. The lucky ones were moved inside or near the sanctuary, the rest were left under the shade of the trees to expire. Captain Brogan was among the lucky ones and was placed in line for treatment.

The interior of the church at night was not the hallowed place that it appeared to be on sunny days. Its darkness felt fathomless. The voices and smells that were present during the day seem to intensify at night. The doors and surrounding trees blocked the light of the stars and moon; the oil lanterns stole what fresh air was available and added yet another smell to the stifling atmosphere.
Cassie as she nursed Captain Brogan by lantern light. He was delirious. She applied cold compresses, changed the bandages of his wounds, and adjusted his bed coverings. She wiped the sweat from his forehead and she held him down as he struggled while he slept. His body stilled as the night deepened. She got up and found a spot on a pew not too far away from Captain Brogan and hummed a Chopin nocturne that lulled her, and those around her, into a peaceful sleep.

Morning returned to the Church. The early morning light shone through what is left of a stained glass window. The sound of the war returned, but a gentle breeze stirred bringing fresh air and a brief respite from the foul air that had accumulated in the sanctuary. Cassie had Captain Brogan’s hand in hers as he slowly regained consciousness. He tried to sit up but the pain from his wounds forced him to lie back down.
 “How did I?” Brogan asked.
“It’s okay. You’re in Logan’s Mill church it’s a hospital now. They brought you here from the battle.” Cassie replied. She stared intently at his eyes. Their color and countenance reminded her very much of Rene. She felt sad and happy in the same moment and held back a strong urge to burst into tears and embrace the man that lay before her. Instead she just stared and allowed fond memories of Rene to dominate her thoughts.
“Who are you?” Captain Brogan asked trying hard to sit up again.
“I’m Cassie. You had quite a night last night. The doctor didn’t think you were going to make it.”
Captain Brogan’s head fell back against his pillow and his eyes rolled back in his head.
 “Greene!” Captain Brogan cried out appearing as though he has slipped back into delirium.
Captain Brogan struggled to sit up. Again he was agitated.
 “Luke, Luke! He’s at it again! Give me a hand with him.” Cassie called out to one of the slaves.
Luke, a large male slave, assisted Cassie in subduing Captain Brogan. They tied him down to his cot with bed sheets. He was subdued and laid flat. Cassie put her hand on his shoulder.
“I’m sorry that we have to do this, but you need to lay flat so your body can heal.” Cassie said and sat down next to her restrained patient. She wiped his brow with a damp rag and caressed his face. Her hand eventually came to rest on his shoulder where it lingered. When he drifted off to sleep, she lifted her hand from his shoulder and walked away to tend to other patients.

The midday sunbeams returned to light the interior of the sanctuary. As Cassie approached Captain Brogan with a bowl of food, she noticed one of the shafts of light shining on her patient. She smiled and took it as some sort of sign regarding his health.
 “I got some food here for you. I think it would be easier if I just feed you myself. You’re not going to raise a fuss are you? “
Captain Brogan shook his head no.
“Greene, what happened to Greene?” He asked Cassie
 “I’m not sure who you’re talking about. I don’t know any Greene. We have so many here, and outside whose names we do not know.” She said guardedly. 
Captain Brogan pushed his head back into the pillow.
“I lost him.” Captain Brogan said and started to struggle against his restraints. He turned his head away from Cassie.
 “You can’t worry about that now. You have to eat or you won’t be able to help anyone. Here, open up.” Cassie started spoon-feeding Captain Brogan. He ate, slowly at first, but he eventually took spoonfuls regularly.

That evening the breeze that had brought fresh air to the sanctuary calmed. For the moment, the war seemed to have moved in another direction. Its sound moved with it. The artillery and musket fire that upset so many had become distant and no longer disturb the injured. After a few brief songs to lure the restless to sleep, Cassie found a spot and fell sound asleep as did Doctor Pratt. 
After a new crescent moon rose, two slaves set a man down on a stretcher next to Captain Brogan. There was only the dim light of kerosene lamps in the room. 
A slave puts a lamp down between the two men. It illuminated their faces. 
Another slave gentle shook Captain Brogan Awake.
 “Captain Brogan. Captain Brogan, can you hear me?” Colonel Martel asked as he rolled over to face the captain. His once fine uniform was now muddied, ripped, and bloody. His once certain gaze now tentative.
 “Yes?” Captain Brogan responded startled awake.
 “Captain, it is I. I have been praying for your survival ever since I heard they brought you in.” Colonel Martel said trying to see if Captain Brogan was fully awake.
 “What happened?” Captain Brogan asked as a slave loosened his restraints.
 “We were betrayed captain.” The colonel said and gave a weak but deathly cough at the end of which he spits up blood into a handkerchief.
 “Are you okay?” The captain asked free of his restraints and able to turn fully toward the colonel.
 “The doctor says I am dying, slowly. He thinks I’m bleeding on the inside and it is just a matter of time, but that is of no consequence. We have a more important matter to discuss.” The colonel coughed again.
 “We have been most savagely betrayed by the worst kind of scoundrel.” The colonel coughed again spitting more blood into his handkerchief. “That major you call a commanding officer has knowingly sent us into the jaws of hell.” 
 “Major Owen?” Captain Brogan responded with surprise tempered by his weakened condition.
 “Yes, Owen. I have known him longer than you, and have suffered his insubordination before.”
 “Sir, the major that I know is.”
 “Please don’t interrupt, captain.” The colonel said and coughed again worse than before.
 “As I said, we have been betrayed. These words come not from me but from a Yankee that we captured.”
 “But sir, Major Owen? He prizes his honor as much as any other gentleman.”
“So he led us to believe but we were told of his treachery, in so many words, by a Yankee my men took prisoner. We did not believe him at first. Because, as you said, we thought the major prized his honor.”
“How do you know the Yankee was telling the truth?”
 “Why would the Yankee lie? My men reconnoitered that camp every day, and they reported no changes. I tell the major and in one day, it turns into hell’s fury. No, sir. It was he.”
Captain Brogan lay back in his bed to take in what he has heard. “But how could he have?”
 “The likes of us will never know how the mind of a traitor works, but just know that we, you and I, have been betrayed. “
Both men briefly lay quiet gathering there strength to continue their conversation.
 “Then you want me to bring him up on charges?” Captain Brogan asked his eyes searching the colonel’s face.
 “No captain. This has now become a matter of honor for men like us and those who died on the field of honor. Vermin like Owen must be exterminated. I don’t believe I will live long enough to do it. That is why I am asking you to avenge the souls of all those who died at his treachery.”
 “You want me to kill him?”
 “I want you to settle his account. His death will be little consolation to those who he betrayed, but it will be something.”
Captain Brogan paused to think.
 “But we are still at war. Killing him would be. . .”
“Captain, when there is an enemy we must meet them and defeat them on the field of honor. There is no other way. One does not maintain one’s honor by staring at each other with eyes full of contempt and a heart full of fear. We are not murderers or assassins that skulk about in the dark. Our cause is just and we employ the force of God himself in our fight. To not fight is to deny God his vengeance, and that is sin. You and I captain, as men of honor, understand this. It is the major, his heart vacant of God’s will, who does not. That is why we must serve as God’s instruments and mete out His justice. Our men died serving the Lord’s cause. They were betrayed by the major. This work must be done for their souls to be able to rest peaceful.” The colonel said then coughed again that was followed by several minutes of wheezing. It took quite a while for the colonel to regain full composure.
“Colonel, surely we haven’t reached the point where we are shooting at each other?”
 “He is as much an enemy as any Yankee, and on my passing, I have left you some tools for your work.” He turned and looked at the slave. “Joshua, would you give my things to the captain.”
Joshua, one of the slave attendants, put a sword and a wooden box under the pew where Captain Brogan’s lay.
 “Why are you giving me these?” Captain Brogan asked looking down at the objects that he had been given.
 “These are your tools of vengeance. The sword is to remind you of the honor betrayed, and in the box is my Le Mat. I call her ‘justice’, and she has never failed me. I expect the same from you. Now I must rest for I am very tired.” Colonel Martel lay back on his stretcher, closed his eyes and quietly died.

