Chapter 14  – Building Anxiety
John Brogan finished his morning meal. Cassie cleaned up behind him. He sat at the kitchen table and puts his boots on.
“You had another difficult night last night. Do you think you’ll be okay working today?” Cassie asked.
“I’ll be fine.”
“You got enough rest?” 
“Yes.” John Brogan replied and finished putting his boots on. He stood up to leave.
“Do you want me to bring a lunch out to you?” 
“No, I’ll just take some biscuits and Jerky with me. If I work straight through I might make it home early today.”
“I’d like that.”
John Brogan kissed her and left her to spend another day in the fields.

A group of Union soldiers rode up on John Brogan while he was working. They went around the fence and galloped across the field that he had just seeded. John Brogan watched their approach. Sergeant Pinket, still on his horse, stepped forward ahead of the other men as his horse snorted and panted in Brogan’s face.
“You John Brogan?” Sergeant Pinket asked.
“I am.” John Brogan said.
“My men and I have been detailed to make sure that you are safe.” Sergeant Pinket said.
Sergeant Pinket’s horse was agitated and maked intimidating movements toward John Brogan.
“I have my neighbors to watch over me. They’ve done a pretty good job so far.” John Brogan replied.
“Is that why you have found it necessary to carry a gun when you are tending field?” Sergeant Pinket asked.
“There’s no law against it.” John Brogan said.
“No there isn’t. By the way, what kind of pistol were you carrying yesterday?” Sergeant Pinket asked.
“The shooting kind.” John Brogan replied.
“You haven’t used it recently have you?” Sergeant Pinket asked.
“Just to stay in practice.” John Brogan said
“Well Mr. John Brogan, just know that the U.S. Cavalry is watching over you, and you have never been safer than you are now. No matter where you go, you can be sure that one of us will be watching.” Sergeant Pinket said.
“I’ll be thinking of you on my next trip to the outhouse.” John Brogan said.
“You do that.” Sergeant Pinket said to John Brogan. “Come on boys, we don’t want to wear out our welcome.” Sergeant Pinket said to his men. The cavalrymen galloped away back across the freshly seeded field.

The Brogan’s were asleep in bed. John Brogan’s sleep was restless. Images of Brogan’s last battle fill his dreams. The last image in his dream was a cloud of dust and the cannon that he saw in town. Brogan woke up screaming. His face was sweaty.
“John, John, my God John, again?” 
“I can’t get away from it.” John Brogan said as Cassie lit the kerosene lamp on the nightstand next to her.
“This is the fifth night in a row.” Cassie said and walked around the bed to hug Brogan.
“I know. These dreams are like pitch forks.” John Brogan said before Cassie embraced him.
“Is it the soldiers watching us that’s bothering you?”
“I don’t understand why they’re so interested in us. There were others they could be watching too.” John Brogan said. They stopped embracing.
“Maybe if we talked to them?” 
“To who? About what? If we act like we’re concerned it might make it worse.” 
“We can’t ignore them forever. This is tearing you apart. You’re tired, I’m tired.” 
“What do you want me to do? Do you want me to start fighting again?” John 
“I’m not asking you to fight anyone. We just need to stop them from watching us. Maybe if we knew why they’re watching us we could put an end to it.”
“And how do you suggest we do that? You want me to go talk to them?” 
“No! But we need to do something, soon.” Cassie said then paused to think. “You want me to play or sing something to help you sleep?”
“No. I think I’ll be okay.”
Cassie walked back around to her side of the bed, put the lamp out, and climbed back into bed.

Captain Noonan was seated at his desk with his feet up. Simpson paced back and forth in front of the desk.
“It’s got to be him. All our intelligence points here and he is the only likely person in town.” Billy Simpson said.
“It looks to me like all you have is a lot of guesswork and town gossip. You’ve been watching him for weeks now and you’re no closer to catching him than you were when you got here.” Captain Noonan replied.
“It’s him. We just scared the rat back into its hole. We’re doing something if we just sit here watching him and keep them renegades from knowing what to do next.” Billy Simpson said as Captain Noonan relit his half-smoked cigar.
“You better be right about this Simpson. If them renegades do something while were sunning ourselves here, it’s me that’s going to look like the fool.”
Billy Simpson stopped pacing and sat down in a chair across from Captain Noonan. “You have a better idea.” 
“Yes. We back off. Let your rat out of his hole. If we lay back a bit and the renegades strike again, we have our man. If everything stays quiet then you have some more work to do.”
“Are you talking about leaving town?” 
“No, I’m thinking that you yank Pinket’s chain. Keep him in the corral for a while.”
“And in the mean time?”
“I go visit them, let them know there are no hard feelings and we see what happens.” The captain said as he pushed the stub of his cigar into the table to put out the stub.
“And what do I do?”
“You and your boys can do some fishing, but maybe their tired of that.” Captain Noonan said with a hint of sarcasm.
“Alright, but if we lose him it’ll be on you.” Billy Simpson said and abruptly got up and walked out of the tent.

Captain Noonan approached the Brogan farmhouse with two soldiers astride him.
Cassie was outside doing chores.
“John, John, we got company!” Cassie said and stopped working stood up and walked toward the farmhouse. John Brogan walked out of the farmhouse pulling up his suspenders. Cassie walked over and stood by him. The two walked together toward Captain Noonan and stopped.
“You can stop right there.” John Brogan said. Captain Noonan and the soldiers stopped. “What do you want?” 
“To talk.” Captain Noonan said.
“About what?” 
“About you, about us.” 
“Okay. You can get off your horse and approach on foot.” John Brogan replied. Captain Noonan and the two other men got off their horses and started walking toward the couple.
“Just you. Unless you need them to help you walk.” John Brogan said.
Captain Noonan gestured to the other two men to stop. He stepped forward alone. “Okay.” The captain approached the couple slowly holding the reins of his horse in one hand. “I understand your. . .” The captain said.
“That’s close enough.” John Brogan said.
“I understand that some of my men have been harassing you.”
“Me and my wife.”
“Yes, you and your wife. Good morning Mrs. Brogan. I hope that the two of you will accept this apology. My men acted in haste and outside of my countenance.” The captain said in an officious tone.
“We’d be pleased to. . .” Cassie replied.
“Cassie, please.” John Brogan said to his wife. ”Is discipline that lax in your command?” John Brogan asked the captain.
“You have a command?” Captain Noonan asked.
“Had.” John Brogan replied.
“Oh. You still seem to speak with an air of authority.”
“You said you wanted to apologize. I think you’re done.” John Brogan said curtly.
“And also, to inform you that I have given direct orders that you are no longer to be singled out.”
“What exactly do you mean by singled out?” 
“I’m sure that you have become aware of the presence of my men. I have told them to pay no more attention to you than they would anyone else.”
“Thank you, captain.” Cassie said.
“Thank you, Mrs. Brogan. And you Mr. Brogan?”
“Yes, well. If there are any more problems.” John Brogan said.
“You’ll come to me. I won’t bother you folks anymore.” Captain Noonan replied then walked back to his horse, mounted it, and rode off with the two soldiers.

