Lester Hunter
Professor Womack
MCW685 Basics of Screenwriting
Brogan’s Burden
1.	Discussing a debt: It is near the end of the Civil War. On the eve of a battle, two men, Lieutenant Colonel Beau Martel and Major Ira Owen, meet in at an isolated location to discuss a debt of honor. Colonel Martel implies that the major is guilty of cowardice during a previous battle. The colonel wants the major to have his troops create a diversionary attack, and implies that he would have him brought up on charges if the major did not comply. The request is outside of the channel of normal commands. The major is a bureaucrat and does not want his record tarnished.
2.	Making the payment: The following day, Colonel Martel rides into Major’s camp. The colonel and major discuss the plan for the battle prior to the arrival of the three company commanders; Captain Brogan is one of them. The five men discuss the details of what is expected to happen during the battle. The company commanders are wary. The senior officers are nervous but insistent.
3.	The Major’s Point: Major Owen takes Captain Owen aside and impresses upon him the need for the diversionary attack to be successful. He wants to ensure that the colonel’s attack is successful.
4.	The Communiqué: The major discusses the current situation with Lieutenant Perry. The major is agitated and annoyed with both the colonel and the captain for their leadership skills and bravery. Perry is sympathetic towards the major. He sends Perry to their headquarters to seek the consent of higher-ranking officers. For Owen it is a win-win, if the attack succeeds, he shares in the glory and if it fails, he can say that he tried to inform his commanders.
5.	The Sergeant’s view: Captain Brogan discusses the next day’s attack with his trusted first sergeant as they see to the distribution of ammunition. The sergeant, Devereux, itemizes the numerous tough situations they have been in and that Brogan has led them to safety. He reiterates his confidence in the Captain’s leadership ability.
6.	The Captain’s men: It is night; the captain is walking through the camp, and his men greet him as he passes the numerous campfires. He responds to many of them by name.
7.	Coffee Break: One of the encamped enlisted men asks the captain to have coffee with them. He stops and has a cup. They talk about the upcoming battle, and whether they will live to see the end of the war.
8.	Reassurance: One of the younger soldiers approaches the captain when he is alone. The soldier is scared, and the captain reassures him by almost guaranteeing that he will live until the end of the war.
9.	Quiet March: The morning of the battle, the captain’s men assemble to march off to fight. The major comes out to see the men off, and Brogan asks about the whereabouts of Lieutenant Kelly. The men are somber as the start on their way. The march is quiet, almost as though they were ghosts.
10.	Before the storm: The captain’s men reach the assembly area. The captain surveys the area. Sergeant Devereux is next to him. It is unusually quiet. The captain gives his men finally instructions for the attack and they settle into their positions to wait.
11.	The fight begins: The sun rises in the sky. The mist clears from the valley. A rebel yell, from the other side of the valley, is heard. The yell is accompanied by gunfire.
12.	Into the fight: Captain Brogan’s company steps out from the tree line and runs down into the valley to charge up the hill beyond. As his men start up the hill, they are hit from Union fire from three sides. Panic ensues as the withering fire decimates his men.
13.	Unexpected wound: The captain is hit and wounded. One of his soldiers drags him to safety. With his back against a tree, he can see his company of men die.
14.	Failed Promise: He sees the young man that he talked with the previous night, kneeling in prayer on the battlefield, just before the young man is obliterated by an exploding shell.
15.	Lights out: A shell explodes near the captain and he is knocked unconscious.
16.	Cassie’s work: A white, wooden framed, partial burnt out church has been converted into a battlefield hospital. A women, in a once fine dress, works as a nurse. She does everything imaginable but operate on the soldiers. Tired and dirty, she stops to rest on the steps of the church. The doctor comes out and they talk about her past and future. This conversation is to set up her back-story and her philosophy of being pro-confederate and anti-war.
17.	The Captain Arrives: A buckboard rapidly approaches and stops at the church. Slaves carry the injured men inside. The doctor follows. 
18.	The Special Patient: The woman, Cassiopeia Jefferson, continues with her normal duties, but she pay special attention to Captain Brogan. Brogan is delirious for a week with sometimes-violent fits. 
19.	Awake again: Captain Brogan awakes from a restless sleep to see Cassie. She is changing the dressing on his wound. She is called away when she starts to try to feed him.
20.	The recuperation: Captain Brogan’s sleep is restless. Cassie feeds him. He eats a little at first, more, and more as they come to know one another. He asks her about what happened to his command. She puts him off.
21.	Reading the letter: The doctor that attended him gives Brogan a letter and a box containing a gun (a Le Mat) before the doctor leaves the hospital. The letter is from Colonel Martel. It gives him Martel’s version of what happened during and after the battle and how the major betrayed them. The letter request that Brogan avenge the deaths of the men he betrayed. He calls the gun the “hammer of god”.
22.	Calming Cassie: He is angry and sullen after reading the letter. Over time, Cassie manages temporarily to calm him.
23.	Their new life: Years have passed. It is spring and thousands of acres of Missouri farmland are put under the plow. Brogan, now a civilian, is plowing the land of his farm. It is late afternoon and he finishes plowing one last row before he heads home for the night. They attend church where Cassie is the organist.
24.	Their quiet life: The farmhouse is small and sparsely furnished. Cassie greets him warmly when she meets him at the door. He is fatigued and irritable. She knows that he has been thinking about that note, the gun, and the war.
25.	Cassie’s concert: She plays piano and sings for him. The piano is old and out of tune in spots, but she is talented. Her playing allows Brogan to fall into a restless sleep.
26.	The ghosts return: While he is in town to pick up seed, a formation Union soldiers ride into town with cannon in tow. Being confederate sympathizers, the townspeople are distraught. The sight triggers unpleasant thoughts and memories for Brogan. His reaction is lost in the townspeople’s loathing of the soldiers.
27.	Misinterpreted: Without telling Cassie, he starts to wear the gun that he was given when he goes out to work the fields. A couple of the townspeople see him and they think that he is some sort of confederate organizer. He continues to have disturbing dreams about the war.
28.	Loose tongues: The townspeople begin to gossip about Brogan and speculate about what he is planning. The men speak of joining him when they have an opportunity. Spies overhear the talk of the townspeople. They report what they hear to the Union camp.
29.	Intimidation: The Union commander orders that Brogan and his wife be watched. Men are sent to watch them. The men are not very discreet kindling hostility from Cassie and Brogan.
30.	Building anxiety: Cassie and Brogan both become wary. She stops playing and singing at night to help him sleep and he starts having series of restless nights. The situation makes them both edgy and irritable.
31.	The search: Union soldiers go to Brogan’s farm to search it while he is not there. They leave the farmhouse and barn a mess. Cassie is fighting mad. 
32.	Cassie gets a gun: A small posse of neighbors shows up at the farm after the soldiers leave. One of the posse members gives Cassie a revolver that she tucks in her apron.
33.	The shootout: Brogan arrives at home just after dusk. Cassie is spooked. She starts shooting in his direction. Brogan, unaware that Cassie is shooting, shoots back and mortally wounding her.
34.	A husband’s grief: Brogan is inconsolable when he finds out what he has done. He is now unable to sleep at all unless he is near complete exhaustion. He starts drinking to help himself fall asleep.
35.	The getaway: After spending some time grieving after burying his wife, Brogan sells his farm, buys a horse, and heads west. On the advice of the telegraph agent, he heads toward Wyoming where they are looking for ranch hands. Work with no questions asked.
36.	An extra gun: He rides as an extra gun on an Overland Stage coach run that is headed west. Along the way, he proves to be handy with his rifle and revolver. The stage is attacked first, by highwaymen and then by rogue Indians.
37.	The recommendation: When the stagecoach reaches Laramie in the Wyoming territory, he is recommended for a job as a hired gun for a cattle rancher. Brogan takes the job. The work disgusts him. Even though he is a hired gun, he acts as a decoy and strategist never actually killing anyone. His drinking increases.
38.	On the town: Brogan is a loaner when he is not working to ambush cattle rustlers. On their monthly trips into town to blow off steam. The others drink, gamble, and chase women. Brogan sits in a dark corner and drinks until he passes out. The other ranch hands carry him upstairs to bed.
39.	Love returns: On one of the monthly trips into town, Brogan notices that one of the new saloon girls he thinks closely resembles Cassie. She approaches him and he offers her a seat, the veteran girls are surprised. They start drinking together and by the end of the weekend they are married. He returns to the ranch penniless, she has taken all his money.
40.	The other man: Brogan shows up in town unexpectedly and catches her in bed with a sheriff’s deputy. He is overwhelmed with anger, frustration, and pain. He shoots him in the butt. He kills her during a fight that she initiates. She throws a knife at him but misses. She then starts to whip him with a bullwhip that she keeps. He grabs the whip pulling it and her towards him. She falls into Brogan and is stabbed in the heart. Brogan is arrested for shooting the deputy. He is tried and sent to prison for shooting the deputy.
41.	Brogan’s punishment: They sentenced Brogan to fifteen years in prison. In prison, the guards taunt him for wearing a Confederate soldier’s belt buckle. Sober again, he becomes unable to sleep. He is left in his cell to rot.
42.	The talker: They toss a talkative prisoner in the cell next to Brogan. He tells Brogan about a manipulative self-serving ex-confederate by the name of Owen. A spark of life enters Brogan and he listens to the man intently. The man describes Owen, confirming that it was the man from his past. The man tells Brogan of the last place he saw Owen. Brogan thinks of the request in the colonel’s note, the men in his company who were his comrades, and the young man to whom he made a promise.
43.	Brogan’s escape: Biding his time, Brogan waits for an opportunity to escape. It comes when they periodically drag him out of his cell to wash him off. They only have two men escort him. Brogan overpowers the two men and runs off into the wilderness.
44.	Fitting out: Accessing one of the provision stashes that the ranch hands maintain he gets food and ammunition. He continues on to where he stashed the colonel’s Le Mat. He steals a horse and heads off toward the Arizona territory.
45.	Lone rider: Friendless, it is a long lonely ride. Locals, Indians, wild animals and the elements, challenge him. By the time he arrives at his destination, his only goal is to survive long enough to kill Ira Owen.
46.	Shooed away: When Brogan rides into town, the townspeople look at him as though he were a rabid dog. His appearance generates a great deal of concern, and the sheriff forces him out of town.
47.	The surveyor: Undeterred, Brogan stalks the town at night. He learns the town layout and the location of his victim. He also plans the murder of Ira Owen.
48.	Ira Owen is overseeing an outdoor auction. The auction is selling land that was taken from the Pai (local) Indians. Owen stands on a platform unaware that Brogan is riding into town intending to kill him. (Owen being the bureaucrat)
49.	Soldier’s Avenged: Brogan spurs his horse on as he approaches the platform where Owen is standing. He stops his horse suddenly in front of the podium. He pulls out his Le Mat and unloads all nine shot at the podium. Panicked townspeople scatter everywhere. Owen, shot three times but still standing, stumbles down the platform and in front of Brogan. Brogan unloads the shotgun shell into Owens body and he falls dead.
50.	Peace restored: The sheriff and his deputies arrive on scene. They shoot Brogan like a mad dog. He falls off the horse onto the ground.
51.	The burden lifted: The sheriff and his deputies walk up to the dead man to view Brogan’s body. Looking down at him, Brogan has a peaceful expression on his face. It is eerie and yet curious. The men at the auction walk by viewing Brogan’s corpse and its unusual facial expression until the sheriff and his deputies break up the crowd.

