Chapter 3 – Cassiopeia’s Longing for Home
	The duet that she played with Rene came to a sudden halt when she missed her entrance after his brief solo. She played a dissonant chord that strangled the sweet sound that had come from her piano. She stood up and walked from the parlor to the balcony of her studio apartment. The railing was wet from a soaking rain from a storm that was breaking up. The clouds still sprinkled the last of the storm’s deluge as she looked west, at the setting sun that appeared through jagged breaks in the clouds. On the street below, the filth that coated the avenues of 1863 Paris had been thoroughly washed away. Cassie placed her hands on the wet railing and stared toward the setting sun lost in thought.
	Rene, after taking time to put his flute and cello away, stepped out on the balcony and stood at a distance behind her waiting for the right moment to speak. He looked up at watched the clouds as they moved hurriedly across the sky as though they were trying to escape the onslaught of the sun. Cassie stood with her hands on the balcony frozen in position. Rene cleared his throat to get her attention. She turned her head to look back at him, but she still did not speak.
	“I hate to see you like this.”
	“I hate being like this. I ruined a whole afternoon of practice for you. .  . I am sorry.” She said and turned her head back around to stare at the sun.
	“Come inside. We’ll have some cognac and talk. There’s a chill out here.” 
	Cassie sighed before she turned and walked toward Rene. He reached out to greet her as she approached. He took her hand in his and they walked together back into the apartment to the parlor. She sat on the Chaise Lounge. He stepped out of the room and poured two glasses. He returned with the glasses, handing her one, and sat down next to her with his. He watched her, as she sipped her drink, admiring the lines of her silhouetted face made by the setting sun.
	“I have never been like this before,” she said resting her half full glass on her knee.
	“I wish you would tell me what it is that bothers you.”
	“It is just foolish that’s all.”
	“What is?”
	“What bothers me.”
	“How could I think that if you don’t tell me?”
	A brief smile moved across her face like a wisp of smoke. It quickly disappeared and was followed by her taking another sip. After swallowing, she took a deep breath and looked at Rene with tears that welled up in her eyes.
	“It has been wonderful here. With you and everyone else, but. . .”
	“But?”
	“I must return.”
	“Return! Why. Is it money?”
	“No, it’s not that. I am quite comfortable.”
	“Then what?” 
	She closed her eyes and the tears in her eyes rolled down her cheeks. “I must go back home.”
	“Home? But there is war there! I am sure your family would rather have you stay here where it is safe. Why would you want to return?”
	“Their letters,” she said pointedly and then paused to regain her composure. “Their letters tell me that something is wrong.”
	“What is wrong?”
	“I don’t know?”
	“Then why worry?”
	“Because Twenty Elms is my home. It is what makes me, me. I cannot sit in some salon or at a banquet here while my family may be subject to privations. You’ve read the stories about the sieges”
	“What makes you think they are suffering?”
	“Their letters speak of things that the papers and other things I have seen and heard contradict.”
	“What do you mean?”
	Cassie stared briefly into Rene’s eyes before slowly lowering her head and shifted her gaze to the cushion of the lounge. It was a long minute before she spoke again.
	“The news of the war is now mixed for our side,” she said at almost a whisper. She then stood up and turned on the gas lights in the parlor. “But my father writes as though the Yankee’s are about to sue for peace.” She finished adjusting the intensity of light in the room and walked back over to the lounge and sat down. “He has not written about my brothers Marcus or Randolph for months though I constantly inquire about him.” She paused again, lost in a thought. “That is not like him.”
	“What do you think it means?”
	“I don’t know, but it worries me. I’ve seen the photographs from America showing the dead on the battlefield. It was a horror. How can men go at each other like that?” Again she paused. Rene could see the fire from the chandelier’s wicks burn in her blue green eyes. Her worried expression hardened to one of anger. “Men are fools.”
	“There are many kinds of men, and many kinds of fools,” he replied and tried to reach out to touch her shoulder. She pulled away from him.
	“I’m not one of your women.”
	“You’re upset. I wanted to console you,” he said as he withdrew his arm.
	“I don’t need to be consoled. I need to go home.” She said as she stood up and walked over to the piano.
	“If you go home, what will you do there?”
	“I don’t know.” She paused again and thought. “I’ll do what’s need to be done.”
	“And what is that?”
	“I don’t know, but I do know that staying here and sipping coffee by the Seine no longer feels right. Sometimes it makes my skin crawl.”
	“I don’t understand you mon ami. Just last week, you were saying how stupid your countrymen were because they were at war. Do you think that your appearance there will bring peace?”
	“It’s not about me.” She snarled.
	“Forgive me. I am just trying to understand you. I had no idea you felt so strongly about these things.”
	Cassie sighed deeply and walked back over to the lounge and sat down. “I find being here, in my happiness, unbearable.”
“It is war. Perhaps war of the worst kind, when men feel as though they are driven by the will of God.” Rene gently placed his hand over hers that rested on the cushion of the lounge. “How will you get back? There is the blockade.”
“I don’t know. There are so many things that keep me here, but I believe more draw me back home.”
“If you go, there will be much to do. And, of course, you cannot go alone.”
*	*	*	* 
At the front of the train, the steam engine panted steam and belched smoke as it was being made ready for its journey. The line of connected passenger cars trailed from the engine back into the darkness of the train shed. It was a particularly bright and clear day at the station. Ladies paraded along the platform’s length wielded their parasols as they moved from passenger car to passenger car either boarding or wishing travelers Bon Voyage on their trip to the coast. Cassie and Rene, dressed in their finest traveling apparel, hurried along the platform searching for their compartment. They were followed by an entourage of well wishers. Upon finding their compartment, the door was opened and a lengthy series of good byes, punctuated with hugs, tears, laughter, and kisses, were shared until the driver wheels of the steam engine began to spin against the rails tugging the train forward. They hurriedly got into their compartment and closed the door. Even then, Cassie and Rene hung out of the window of their compartment, waving goodbye as the train continued to move forward, until their friends shrank into colored dots on the now distant station platform.
The two sat back into their seats, flushed and perspiring, catching their breath and allowing the rush of thoughts and emotions to settle. The wind from the open window whipped around the compartment and brought welcomed relief to the two travelers. Out the window, the cityscape soon changed to country landscape as the train made its way to Dieppe. They remained silent for quite some time taking in the scenery that danced before them like an ever changing Impressionist landscape. Rene would sneak glances of Cassie noticing a long absent look of tranquility on her face. With each glance, he would smile and look back out the window. The rhythmic sounds and gentle sway of the train gently rocked the two of them and, like children in a bassinet, were soon fast asleep.
*	*	*	* 
The next morning, Cassie and Rene waited in a café drinking coffee while their ferry took on coal. High clouds obscured the sunlight blurring the line between shadow and light. The humidity added to the sullen and oppressive air of the day that was intermittently relieved by a breeze off of the channel. In their separate hotel rooms, neither Cassie nor Rene slept well which was reflected in long silences between them as they drank their coffee. 
“When we get to Liverpool I have arranged some meetings with my contacts about our journey in America,” Rene said taking on an even more somber expression. “Are you sure. . .”
“Yes, I am sure.”
“What is the matter,” Rene asked sitting back in his seat and looked Cassie in the eye. Cassie stared back at him. Her stern expression softened.
“I’m not being much of a traveling companion am I?” She said forcing a smile. “This is all very disruptive. I feel as though I am dragging you along into something unpleasant that I should be doing myself.”
“Don’t think that. I am with you because I want to be.”
“But why? We are not lovers, and I do not expect my feelings for you to change, especially now.”
“I do not expect us to be lovers,” Rene paused and took a sip of coffee. “You are my dear friend. It is an emotion that is quite novel for me to feel towards a woman, but I think, to love you as I would want to love a woman would be too much work. You are headstrong, opinionated, and sometimes moody. You speak your mind and are entirely too honest to make a tryst between us any fun, but the things that keep me from being your lover are those that also most attract me to you.”
Cassie smiled shyly. “But I do fear for you. I am not sure what I am getting myself into and have no wish to involve you.”
“You flatter yourself. I am doing this much more for me than you. How many books can you read before one’s conversation becomes well, tiresome. But to have a real life adventure with the likes of you will generate stories that can be told over and over.”
Cassie gave Rene a weak smile then looked down. “There’s more to this than you know.”
“What?”
Cassie looked up before she spoke “There’s more to this than you know.”
“What more can there be? You have told me that you wish to be with your family. It is reason enough for me. Besides, I have my own reasons for accompanying you.”
“But with you with me, I fear what would happen if I lose heart.”
“What are you saying? You do not want to go?”
“No, but I have other reasons for going. Reasons that I have been keeping to myself, and now that we are here, I don’t feel its right to keep them from you.”
“Go on.”
“I have told you many times about my memories of Twenty Elms. About the beautiful memories I have of the privilege and graciousness of home.” Cassie paused but Rene nodded anxiously urging her to continue. “When I was young, five I believe, I was taken by a woman they said had a fever of sorts. She was poor, and I remember, when I was with her, being hungry and cold and afraid that I would never see my mother and father again. What I really remember is crying and crying. It felt like I cried for the entire two weeks she had me. They caught her eventually, but that feeling has never left me. Before then, I thought everyone, except the darkies, lived as we did. I didn’t know what poverty was. That time in my life has haunted me ever since, and the thought that my family may be going through something like that has gnawed at me the entire time I lived in Paris. The news of the war has made it worse, unbearable.”
“I am sorry you had to have such an experience at such a young age.”
“But you see now why I act as I do.”
“I do, but I believe such thing give those who experience them an inner strength that they are not aware of.”
“I hope you are right.” She said just before the ferry’s steam whistle blew.
“We should go.” Rene said, stood up and reached out to grab Cassie’s hand. She looked up at him gave him a long warm smile before she got up from her seat to go with him to the ferry.
*	*	*	* 
Liverpool was unusually hot and seemed a world away from their more familiar Paris. The city itself appeared to exist for the industrial revolution alone. There were factories everywhere. Most of them spewed thick clouds of smoke into the air that gathered and hung low over the city that blocked direct sunlight from reaching the city’s inhabitants. When the air was stagnant, breathing quickly became an unwelcome labor. Workhorses and other beasts of burden had to be handled gingerly for fear they might be overwhelmed by the thick air. Clouds of smoke would drift around the streets like phantoms looking for victims to engulf. Those who could: remained inside; those who could not: waited for relieve from mother earth who, in her good time, would regularly blow the suffocating smoke away. Cassie and Rene spent the time waiting for their ship to sail, by reading, taking trips into the countryside, and meeting Rene’s various contacts who, like the phantom clouds of smoke, appeared and disappeared without any knowledge of where they came from or where they were headed.
On their return from a particularly pleasant trip to the country, Cassie and Rene were headed to their rooms to freshen up. Rene, as a part of his arrival ritual, would briefly stop at the front desk to check for messages, and, as usual, Cassie waited in the lobby.
On his approach to the front desks, the expression on the face of the concierge changed from its usual calm to a look just short of alarm. The concierge gestured for Rene to meet him at an unoccupied space of the counter. Rene approached and placed his hands against the edge of the counter unconsciously bracing himself for whatever news that he was about to receive.
“There is a Fedders to see you, sir,” the concierge said leaning in to speak as confidentially as possible.
“What is a Fedders?” Rene asked leaning away uncomfortable with the stranger’s proximity.
“Not what, sir, who. He is a man, he calls himself Fedders.”
“You mean Mister Fedders.”
“No, I tried that, sir, and was rebuffed most directly. I suggest you not try. He wishes to be called Fedders and requested that I direct you to him immediately upon your return.”
“Fine, send a boy and tell him I will be down directly.”
“Sir, I was instructed to direct you to him without delay. He is in the Tennyson number two sitting room.” The concierge said in a voice that teetered somewhere between a command and a plea. He lifted his left hand and in a wide sweeping motion pointed it toward the sitting room where Fedders was waiting.
Rene’s stare challenged that of the concierge. “I have a lady friend who is waiting for my immediate return.” The concierge lowered his hand.
“I’ll have a boy notify her of your delay. What’s the lady’s name?”
“Jefferson, Cassie Jefferson.” Rene stared at him one last time before he walked down the hall to meet his waiting guest.
The sitting room was dark when Rene entered. It was illuminated only by shafts of light that seeped in through the half opened slats of the shuttered windows and light from the door that Rene had just opened. It illuminated a young boy dressed in clothes that were in tatters. He sat in a large arm chair upholstered in red leather. The boy sat up with a start and stared at Rene like an alerted watchdog. At the same time, a large cloud of smoke came from the chair whose back was to Rene and the door.
“Is it him Beacon?” The question came from deep raspy voice from behind the chair. The boy nodded. “Come in Monsieur Bellamy, sit, we have business to discuss,” continued the voice from behind the chair. Another large cloud of smoke was pushed into the air from behind the chair. When the smoke reached Rene he realized that it was the smoke of a particularly fine cigar. It quality and aroma caused Rene to cautiously enter the semi-dark room.
“Do we have to sit in the dark?” Rene complained as he reached the side of a chair that sat perpendicular to both the boy and the man.
“Beacon, door,” the man said abruptly. The boy jumped from his seat and had the door closed almost as quickly as the command was uttered. He returned to his seat just as quickly. With the light of the corridor staunched, Rene’s eyes adjusted to the room’s light and shapes that were shadows began to show more definition. Rene slowly sat down in the chair that he stood next to and the man in the chair leaned forward and turned toward Rene. “In my business, careful is rule number one. It is how I earned the respect of my customers and cohorts.” He paused to puff his cigar. “Normally, I would retire from doing business with your sort, but when Adrianne Bonhomme vouches for them, well then that changes things. What is it that I can do for you?” asked the stout man with great beard.
“Well, I . . . I mean we were hoping to make our way from here to a city in the American South and were looking for some assistance along the way.”
The expression the large man’s face darkened. He puffed his cigar. As he puffed, his expression brightened to one of serious concern. “What would the likes of you want to go to a place like that at a time like this?” He asked in a deep, gravelly, barely discernible voice.
“She is from the city of Corinth in the Republic of Mississippi and wishes to return to be with her family in their time of need.” Rene replied sitting forward hoping to get a better look at the man. The man in the chair sat back in his seat and continued to puff his cigar the smoke obscuring his face from Rene.
“Does she know what she is asking?”
“I test her resolve at every opportunity, and, as best as I can tell, it is steadfast.”
 “And what is your part in this?”
“She is my dear friend, and I cannot let her do this alone.”
“Alone?” Fedders laughed long and hard. Rene waited for him to finish. All the while, the gaze of boy, Beacon, patrolled the doors and windows as though he could see through them to the other side. Eventually, Fedders laugh subsided.
“Have either of you seen war? I mean modern war.”
“I’ve seen the photographic exhibits.”
Fedders leaned forward again and turned to look at Rene. He looked Rene up and down. “What do you think Beacon.” The boy glanced at Rene and shrugged his shoulders. 
“They won’t sell you out, and as long as they pay in advance. . .”
“Sharp boy that Beacon, he’ll be quite the business man in his time.”
“So you will help?”
“Against my better judgment, yes. But it will cost you, Sovereigns and lots of them. What you asks will not be easy, even for the likes of me.” Fedders sat back in his chair. “We’ll be in touch with you in a couple of days, but I suggest in the mean time you teach the woman to handle a pistol. It will come in handy where you’re going”
“What for? I hardly think that it would be necessary.” Rene asked.
“She’ll need to know how to protect herself; you’re not going to a garden party.”
“Indeed.”
“Now, if you’ll excuse us, we have other business to attend to. Beacon, open the door for the man.” Beacon jumped from his chair and, with the stealth of a burglar, opened the door. He then gestured with his head indicating that it was okay for Rene to leave.
