Chapter 8 – Healing Wounds Festering Scars
	In the quiet hours of the morning prior to the stirring of those soldiers lucky enough to sleep, Cassie got up and walked down to a nearby creek to wash. Doctor Pratt, concerned about her safety, had given her a derringer which she carried in her waist. Her experiences on her trip home from Paris tested her faith in humankind. The little gun she carried was always loaded and well concealed. Deep down, Cassie felt that carrying the gun made her a hypocrite, but she was also pragmatic and knew that desperate situations created desperate people for which desperate measures had to be taken.
	She slept particularly well that night, and for the first time in several weeks felt truly rested. She knew not to make too much noise on her walk back from the creek, but, along the way, with the weight of fatigue lifted she did have a strong desire to sing. The war had not overcome her love of music and the melody of a Chopin waltzes played in her head on her walk back to the church. Dawn was Cassie’s favorite time of day, and the day’s circumstances, with the lack of new wounded and a good night’s sleep, suggested that her day would be a good one. Closer to the church, she could see Doctor Pratt and the slave orderlies moving around the grounds. A fire had been started to prepare a hot breakfast for those able to eat. The fire itself was kept hidden, but the smell of the smoke reminded her that she was hungry. Recent experience had taught her that fear and frustration were good appetite suppressants.
	The slaves Joshua and Luke were unusually aloof that morning. Cassie was used to receiving a report from them on the previous night’s status of the patients which she would verify and, when necessary, share her observations with Doctor Pratt. The process worked well and it freed the doctor from visiting every soldier, instead he visited only those in need of his attention. That morning there was no report. It was a fact that did come to Cassie’s mind until the doctor asked her how things were going. It was a question that she was at a loss for an answer. When she turned around to find the two slaves who reported to her, she found that both had found other tasks to consume their time and prevented her from getting her report. Without her report, she continued on with her daily duties of checking the stock of bandages, the availability and quantity of fresh water, and whether the doctor’s instruments had been cleaned. All had been done, and, when exiting the pastor’s office that was now a supply room, she bumped into Joshua. He looked as though he was about to get a limb amputated. The shock on his face startled her and the two of them stood there in a dumbfounded silence. Joshua was first to move and turned to leave.
	“Joshua?” Cassie asked in a stern tone with a hint of confusion. “Joshua, come here. I wish to speak to you.”
	“I’ve got to get these things to Doctor Pratt,” he replied. “He wants them right away.” Joshua added and turned to leave.
	“You aren’t carrying anything that Doctor Pratt can’t wait for another minute.” Cassie said and placed her hands on her hips. “What’s the matter with you?” She asked him finally able to make eye contact. “Why are you avoiding me?”
	“I’m not Miss Jefferson. It’s just that Luke and I are real busy this morning.” He replied trying to find a moment where he could break away from her stare.
	“Busy? This is the first morning in weeks that I have had time to gather my thoughts before I started doing anything. You two aren’t busy. What’s going on you?”
	Joshua’s gaze moved to floor much like that of a child caught in a lie. He started to fidget and twitch as he had a habit of doing when confronted. “Soldiers died last night Miss Jefferson.” He said in a confessional tone.
	“I know, we lose soldiers all the time. You should be used to that.”
	“We moved one, Miss Jefferson.”
	“You’re supposed to move them so we can make room for others.”
	“We moved him before he died, Miss Jefferson.”
	“Before he died? Who told you to do that?”
	“He did, Miss Jefferson.”
	“Why would you do that without either me or Doctor Pratt telling you?”
	“He told us we’d burn in hell if we didn’t do what his said.”
	“And you were fool enough to believe him?”
	“He talked powerful serious Miss Jefferson.”
	“And he died when you moved him?”
	“No ma’am. He died after we put him down and he talked a while with another soldier.”
	“Did the man he talked to die?”
	“No ma’am.”
	“Who did the dead man talk to?”
	“The soldier Luke tied down yesterday.”
	Cassie’s hands slid from her hips to her sides and balled up into fists. Her teeth clenched and it seemed like she was about to hit Joshua. Instead, she shrieked and stormed passed him down the hall toward the sanctuary. Luke was laughing as he talked to another slave when he saw Cassie and the expression on her face. His laugh changed to an expression of shock and pain like someone who had just been stung by a hornet. He looked for an exit, but he was too surprised to think straight. Cassie walked straight up to him.
	“Luke, I just got finished talking to Joshua. What happened last night?”
	The expression of shock on Luke’s face changed to one of solemnity and ignorance.
	“Last night?”
	“Yes, last night. He told me that you carried a soldier around who died. I want to know exactly what you two were doing.”
	A confused look formed on his face. “We did a lot of things last night Miss Jefferson.”
	“What do you think I want to know about what you did last night? I know you are not stupid and neither am I. I want you to tell me so I can tend to these poor souls without causing them too much suffering.” She paused briefly and softened her tone. “You want that don’t you?”
	“We were just doing what we were told Miss Jefferson.”
	“I know Luke.”
	“Maybe its best you talk to the captain we tied down yesterday.”
	Cassie’s eyebrows knitted up. “Perhaps it is.” 
	Captain Brogan spent that morning reliving the most painful moments of his life over and over again. It was as though he was in a waking dream with the same terrible result repeated over and over again. He wanted to cry out again and again, but the image that bedeviled him seemed to dissipate just before he felt he could hold back anymore as though they were washed away by a tide. The only noises he made were whimpers and groans that were lost in the sounds coming from those around him. He didn’t see Cassie as she approached, but Cassie saw him, sweaty, unshaven, and the distant look of a man lost within himself. She stopped to watch him from a distance. He sat on the blanket and sheets where they first put him. She felt pity, anger, and helplessness as he twitched and mumbled to himself. Cassie went and got Luke to bring her patient out of his self-induced state. With Luke standing over him, and Cassie sitting at his side, she cautiously touched his shoulder and gently called his name.
	“You want me to shake him?” Luke asked with his large hands ready to grasp Captain Brogan’s shoulders. Cassie shook her head no and Luke stood ready to subdue the man in front of him. Exposure to similar situations had taught them the necessity of such precautions. Cassie gently touched his shoulder again and Captain Brogan suddenly snapped to his feet, yelled for his first sergeant and burst into tears. He blindly fell forward into Luke bawling like a baby. Luke gently pushed him away back into Cassie’s arms. Cassie sat Captain Brogan down and let him finish crying with his head on her shoulder. As he cried, she closed her eyes and thought of the music that used to come from her Paris apartment. Captain Brogan cried himself to sleep and Cassie needed Luke’s help to lay him flat on the pew so he could continue his sleep undisturbed.
	Captain Brogan’s sleep, although externally peaceful, continued to be a playground for his newly found anxieties and regrets. His current dream was of the time of Colonel Martel’s first visit and their discussion. His memory of the major now distorted. The major appeared as a sort of demon replete with horns on his forehead and a serpent’s tail. The major’s hand appeared as a scaly claw that emitted a low flame and burned paper wherever the major touched it. The map that the colonel brought of the battlefield now had scorches and burns from the major’s touch. Each of the frightful images greatly disturbed the captain and caused him to freeze in place. He wanted to cry out and warn those around him but found himself unable to speak. His throat felt choked and burnt by the drink the major had offered. The images of the meeting slowly faded into a darkness where the captain sensed vague yet palpable threats from all sides. It was in such an uneasy sleep that the captain remained as he slept that afternoon.
	Cassie’s felt that her concern for the captain was no excuse for her to neglect the rest of the patients. The lull they had experienced the previous day had ended and a steady flow of fresh wounded arrived that day. It kept Cassie busy enough that she found herself more focused on saving the lives that hung in the balance in front of her than on the concerns of one man who seemed well on the road to recovery from his physical wounds.
	Afternoon turned to evening and Cassie went from surgery, to crisis, to death in a seemingly endless cycle. It was a dizzying and numbing routine that she knew must be done and for the sake of solace, compared her effort to that of the soldier in the field to keep moving. With most of the action at an end, she washed up, performed the night inventory, and gave Luke and Joshua their instructions for the night. Cassie, almost blind with fatigue found a spot on a pew to throw a blanket over and fell asleep.
	Captain Brogan was awake after a long afternoon nap. He was surrounded by the last thing he needed to see. The wounded and dying that populate the church do nothing but remind him of the fight were he lost his men. He felt that he was to blame. He should have known about his commanding officer and his lack of honor. He should have known that he was leading his men into an ambush. His first sergeant, who died in the fight, all but told him what was happening but he chose to ignore the advice. All of that, he felt, was his fault, but then there was the devil that led them into the trap: the major. He fantasized about the major’s demise at his hands with the colonel’s weapons. In some of the fantasies the death is swift and final, in others; the death is slow, messy and painful. In all of his fantasies, the major’s death is coupled with a release of tension and a profound sense of feeling the gratitude of others, but with each release came the return of anxiety when the captain realized that the major’s death was only a fantasy.
	When that evening’s moon had fallen far below the horizon and all in the make-shift hospital who could fall asleep had fallen asleep, Captain Brogan decided it was time for him to leave and deliver the vengeance with which the colonel had charged him. He easily stepped passed those whose task it was to keep an eye on him and made his way out into the darkness. He moved slowly being unsure of each step he took. In the cool air of the night, he could hear and smell the presence of a horse. He walked like a blind man with his hands out in front of him led only by his sense of touch, hearing and smell. Invisible obstacles acted as snares put in place to foil his escape. Twigs snapped, branches and seedlings poked and slapped him, rocks and protruding tree roots caused him to stumble, but he continued in his search for the horse. In the darkness, Captain Brogan felt that time moved unevenly. It moved quickly when pain was inflicted like stubbing his toe, but it moved slowly in the length of time it took to find the horse. The sounds of the horse became distinctly louder the closer he got. Until he thought he was so close he could reach out and touch it. He spoke in gentle tones so as not to spook it inching closer until he could feel the warmth it radiated. From that point it was only a matter of him untying the horse and riding off. He would have to go bareback he thought to himself and figured the possibility of finding the rest of the horse’s tack slim. He untied the horse and walked a short distance away from the church. In a field, near the stand of trees that acted as a wind break, he waited for the first light of day.
	Skirmishes between the two armies occurred like lightning strikes, their randomness worrying the senior commanders of both armies. Such was the state of things that Captain Brogan rode into that dawn. As he rode, his first thought was on getting a blanket and saddle for his horse. The ride proved uncomfortable for both. His luck provided him a chance encounter with a group of staff officers that were assembled at the top of a ridge overlooking a wide valley. He urged the horse forward, as best he could, toward the group of men on horseback. His approach did not go unnoticed. One of the younger officers moved closer to the senior officer and pointed out the captain’s arrival. From their point of view, Captain Brogan’s appearance was the very image that they were trying to quell. The captain was a pitiful sight. His mount was an overworked and underfed nag that was not well groomed. The captain did not appear to be in much better condition. His uniform was torn in places, muddy, and stained with blood. He also had a now dirty bandage on his forehead that partially covered a nasty bruise. He was also unwashed and unshaven. In all, he was the antithesis of the image that they were trying to project toward the enlisted and the enemy. He received an icy reception from the younger officers which did not deter him as he headed for the colonel with the field glasses.
	“Colonel, Captain John Brogan reporting for duty.” The captain said after he stopped his mount, sat up straight, and gave a crisp salute. The colonel turned around slowly to look at the man who had addressed him. He looked him up and down and then looked him straight in the eye before he returned the salute.
	“Captain, my men and I appreciate your devotion to the cause but are you aware of what a sad sight you are? Your horse, your uniform, and you are in no condition to lead men into a fight.” The colonel said in a firm but compassionate tone.
	“But sir, I still got fight in me and if you could provide me some assist in getting a fresh horse, uniform, and shave I will be ready to lead men through the gates of hades itself.” Captain Brogan said plaintively. Some of the staff officers laughed at Captain Brogan’s proposition which was followed by the colonel surveying his staff with a stern look of displeasure. The colonel’s look was followed by silence.
	“No, captain,” the colonel said. “You look as though you have already served the cause honorably and could use some time recuperating. We need men with your spirit, but we need them whole so they can give there all when the time comes.”
	“But colonel, I’m ready now.”
	“Captain, you are injured, and from the looks of you, it appears you saw a pretty hard time. I am ordering you to seek medical care and follow it until you are well enough to rejoin your unit. Do you understand Captain?”
	The captain’s face displayed the pain, confusion, and fatigue that he had tried to hide.
	“But sir,” Captain Brogan said imploringly.
	“Captain Shanley, escort the captain here to the nearest aid station to have his injuries tended to.”
	“Yes sir.” Captain Shanley replied and urged his horse forward toward Captain Brogan.
	“That won’t be necessary colonel,” Captain Brogan said. “I still know how to follow orders.” He added as he saluted and then turned his horse away from the group of assembled officers.
	“Captain Brogan,” the colonel said as the captain started back down the hill. “The South appreciates your sacrifice and looks forward to your return.”
	Captain Brogan could respond only by turning his head and acknowledging with a hand gesture since the horse he rode had a mind of its own. It was not fast horse, but it was surefooted and moved along at a steady pace.
	Captain Brogan had gone only a short distance before his thoughts drifted back into his waking nightmares of guilt and revenge. At that point he was riding blind. He did not notice when Confederate infantrymen appeared from out of nowhere in the golden field of grass beside him. They had apparently been squatting there for some time waiting for the next tide of soldiers to appear and sweep them away. Captain Brogan was the first soldier to approach, and he being an officer gave them all the more reason to make themselves known to him. It was not until the horse whinnied at the approach of one of the soldiers did Captain Brogan become aware of his surroundings and the men that approached.
	There were about a dozen of them. They were all battle worn and, to various degrees, dazed. The captain surveyed them slowly as they approached.  For him, they appeared as ghosts from his last command. Their appearance stunned him and left him wondering what was going to happen next. He fully expected them to attack him and take out their anger for his poor guidance and was truly surprised when one approached him looking like a hollow eyed scarecrow and asked him if he was there to lead them. It was not at all what he expected and was momentarily at a loss for words, but he took the event as a sign of redemption. The mist of the dark and depressing thoughts that surrounded him cleared. For the first time in days he felt like his old self and could feel the true intensity of the pain from his physical wounds. His arm and back were sore and he had a headache. None of these things stopped him from dismounting and gathering together the men from the field. They weren’t much to look at, but they were armed men looking for someone to lead them. He had one of the men hold his horse while he looked the rest of them over with his hands on his hips. 
	“Do any of you have a pistol I can use? I lost mine.” The captain asked the members of his newly adopted troop. One of the wiry soldiers walked up and handed him a pistol by the butt end.
	“Got it from a dead Yankee we came across a ways back.” He said and smiled flashing his well-rotted teeth. The captain nodded his head and took the weapon sticking in the top of his britches. The man stepped back into the group without saluting.
	“How long have you men been out here without anyone to lead you?” The captain asked.
	“A couple maybe three days,” replied one of the older men of the group.
	“Where’d you all come from?”
	“We had been with the seventh Georgia until after the fight the other day. It started in the late afternoon and went into the evening. By time it got full dark we had no idea of where we, or the rest of our company, were and have been wandering around ever since.”
	“Can you all shoulder your muskets and form up in two columns.” The captain said and then mounted his horse as the wiry men that resembled scarecrows organized themselves into the requested formation. They started marching down the road behind the captain. As slow as his horse moved the men behind him soon had difficulty keeping up. He looked behind him to see a group of men whose formation had broken apart with the healthier ones keeping up and the other’s lagging behind in order of their physical condition. The fall day had become unusually hot and humid, and after a Mississippi summer lacking food, water and adequate sanitation, there was little more that could be expected from the men. Captain Brogan took it upon himself to rest the men of his new command and finding the first stand of trees that provided shade he order them to rest in the shade. The order was accepted with a great deal of relief. Those who could moved under the shade as quickly as they could, those who could not, found the first spot of shade and collapsed in exhaustion. The captain himself, not allowing one of the men to take his horse, found a spot for it and rested his back against a tree. It was how they all spent the middle part of the breezeless afternoon, where the wake from a flying insect passing by was appreciated and welcomed. Many of the men, the captain included, had drifted off into a lazy consciousness, the marker just before sleep. When suddenly, the sound of thunder entered their half-conscious dreams and shook them awake. It was cavalry on the move.
	For the tattered and weary confederate soldiers the sound was electrifying. They all got to their feet with unexpected energy. For Captain Brogan, the sound was that of the approach of redemption. On his feet he looked sharped, tuned for a fight. With his pistol in hand, he used hand motions to disperse the men. The men dispersed themselves about the field and readied their weapons. It was either the beat of their hearts or the pounding hooves that deafened them. They all looked back at the captain waiting for him to give the order to start firing. As the heads of the soldiers of the first formation appeared, fingers got itchy. The men looked back at the captain, like lighting fireflies, waiting for him to either fire or give the order to fire. The first formation passed and no order was given. A second formation appeared and the captain, pistol in hand, stood frozen in position as though hypnotized. The men understood the power and impact of a coordinated volley and no one wanted to shoot without being order. The second formation passed and the men looked back at the captain. His pistol shook in his hand. The men looked back at him in shock, disappointment and disgust. The second formation rode by and moved off into the distance like a passing thunderstorm. The meadow once again, became quiet, the heat returned, and the sound of the crickets returned.
	“Dang! I thought we had a leader,” one of the men said after he un-cocked his musket and stood up. “He couldn’t lead a pig to dinner.”
	Another soldier stood up and shouldered his musket. “I’m going to find me some Yankees to kill. I may be tired and hungry, but I don’t tremble at the sight of them.” He punctuated his remark by spitting on the ground in the direction of the captain and then turned and walked away.
	“Yeah, we all might as well follow Jess. This one has gone yellow on us.” A third soldier said and started after Jess who was already walking down the road. The rest of the men grumbled, some of them spat, as they, one by one, fell in with Jess. Captain Brogan could only stand there, his mouth agape, in shock at what had just happened and what was happening. Men who once trusted him were walking away from him in disgust and shame. As the last one left, Captain Brogan closed his mouth and shut his eyes and his chin fell toward his chest in shame. He waited a while so those men had a good lead before he mounted his horse and started back the way he came. The shame he felt overwhelmed his other pain. His head hung low as he rode along.

	The church was relatively quiet as he approached on his appropriated horse. It ambled up and stopped at the same spot from which he took it. The captain got off, tied the horse to a fence post, and quietly walked into the church. It was Joshua who first saw him. He walked over and nudged Cassie. Cassie stopped what she was doing and gave him a long hard stare. She waited until the flush of anger passed over her face before she approached. She walked right up to him, took his wrist in her hand, and looked him in the eye. “Welcome back captain. We were concerned about you.” She said very gently and then led him back to the section of pew where they had laid him. “Please lie down and rest. You are still not well and must be tired.” She added and gently tugged at his wrist encouraging him to lie down. The captain lay down on the pew and turned his head away from her in fatigue and shame. Cassie leaned in close to him and spoke in his ear. “I know of some of the place you have been and can only imagine the echo of the horror that you have in your heart.” She draped a blanket over him and walked away.
