Chapter 13 – Loose Tongues
	The Catensville livery stable sat behind the small hotel and boarding house located in the center of town. Sunlight filtered by clouds peeked through the cracks of the stable where there were about a dozen stalls. Adjacent to the stable was the blacksmith’s shop where the sound of steel being pummeled and the smell of it being tempered in both fire and water filled the air.
Peter stood near Sven, the blacksmith, as he shoed a horse. Sven moved back and forth from the horse, to the forge, to the anvil. There were others in the stable who sat on the benches that the blacksmith used to keep tools on or place items that were still being worked.
“I’m telling you, you should have seen him. It was like seeing all that cavalry made him sick to his stomach.” Peter said.
“I’m sure Mr. Brogan had a good reason for acting like that. He has a big farm and a lot of work to do. It could be that he over worked himself. That’s easy to do now that it is getting warmer. I know, it happens to me sometimes.” Sven said in broken English lilted by his mother tongue.
“But why when the cavalry showed up?” Peter asked.
“Boy, you say you saw a confederate get sick when he saw the cavalry come into town?” Watkins asked.
“I didn’t say he was a Confederate, but he used to be. He fought the whole war as a Johnny Reb. You should hear his wife. She’s a real southern belle. She has the accent and everything.” Peter replied.
“Don’t listen to the boy. He’s just likes listening to himself. John Brogan and his wife are decent church going people. They’ve been here since just after the war, and they’re as much trouble as rain for crops.” Sven said.
“I’m not trying to start any trouble.” Peter said.
“I know you aren’t, but you need to be careful what you say when there are others around. They don’t know those folks like we do.” Sven said.

John Brogan ate his breakfast in silence as sat across from Cassie at the kitchen. It wasn’t quite sunup and Cassie had a lamp lit that filled the room with a soft yellow light. She studied John Brogan’s face trying to see if what she heard happened to her husband the previous day had any lasting effect. There was not much there to read. His lack of expression could mean many things as it was early and he could just be tired or just in one of his silent spells. She also searched her thoughts for something to say to him. She didn’t want to say just anything to him, but she wanted to say something meaningful and uplifting. Half of her intention was to make his day more pleasant and the other half was to see how irritable he was. She also knew that such a test was like trying to test to find the distance that a match lights kerosene. He stood up when he finished and flashed a smile at her before he turned to walk out the door on his way to seeding the fields. She waited a moment before she stood up, walked to the door, and watched him as he walked to the barn. After a long minute of darkness, she could see that he had lit a lantern and was making his way up to the hay loft where he kept the seed.
When John Brogan lit the lamp by the door of the barn he assumed that Cassie was watching him from the kitchen. He inhaled deeply and sighed before he lifted the lantern to carry it further into the barn. He also knew that the light would indicate to her where he was. He held the lantern as he walked up the barn stairs to the loft and to the end of the barn opposite the farmhouse. If she was watching, he figured this might pique her curiosity. In front of him, by the loft door sat the bags of seed. He figured if she retraced his steps that her journey would end there, but John Brogan had one last place to go. He looked up into the darkness of the barn’s rafters and put the lantern down. He started climbing toward them. First he climbed over bales of hay and then grabbing hold of the support beams until he was near the top. It was there in the darkness that he felt around for the sword and the wooden box that contained the colonel’s gun. He had to maintain a precarious hold in order to retrieve the items. Once he had the gun case in his hand he started back down. On the floor of the loft he opened the case, pulled the gun out and stuck it in the waist of his trousers. He then gathered the seed bags and his horse and headed out to the field that he planned on seeding that morning.

The spring sun had just burned off the chill of the morning. John Brogan had been seeding since sunup one of several fields that he had recently plowed. He had the revolver that Colonel Martel gave him shoved in his belt around his waist. As he paced up and down the furrowed rows of the field, he could see Jack Richmond, a neighbor approach on his buckboard. Jack stopped and waited as John Brogan approached the fence that was near the road.
“Hi John, is there a problem?” Jack Richmond asked.
“No, why?” John Brogan asked looking up at his neighbor somewhat curious.
“Well, you have a pistol in your belt. I thought that you liked us?”
“I do! It’s just that I heard that there were renegades around, and I would keep some protection with me.”
“Those people have been around since the end of the war.”
“What about the soldiers that came into town yesterday?”
“Them? They don’t know what to do with themselves since the war ended. They’ve been chasing those renegades all over the place, but them renegades always manage to be just over the next hill.”
“Oh, well. I guess there’s nothing really to be worried about then. I suppose I can keep the gun at home.”
“That’s how I figure it. Okay, John. Have good morning.” Jack Richmond said and gentle snapped at the reins signaling his horses to continue on toward town.
“You too, Jack.” John Brogan said as his neighbor moved along down the road.

Jack Richmond, Perkins the store clerk, Peter, and several other townspeople stood around the counter in the general store talking. Most of the conversation centered on the arrival of the cavalry regiment.
“It was a darn strange thing seeing him out there like that. I don’t think I have ever seen a man from this town with a gun unless they’re hunting.” Jack Richmond said while the others looked on enthralled.
“You see, I told you. He’s been acting strange ever since those soldiers came to town.” Peter said attempting to momentarily grab the attention of the others.
“Come to think of it, he did say something about soldiers and them being after renegades and needing to protect himself.” Jack Richmond said.
“You don’t think he’s one of those renegade leaders do you?” Perkins said.
“Oh, come on. He’s been here for almost three years, and he’s not been a peep of trouble. We shouldn’t let our imaginations get ahead of us.” Jack Richmond said dismissively.
Billy Simpson a customer at the back of the store distracted Perkins by playing with a scale.
“Hey, you that’s not for sale.” Perkins said.
“Sorry, I was looking for the price tag.” Billy Simpson stepped away from it getting the entire group of men to look at him. He took a quick inventory of the faces of the people he planned on following up with.
“Like I said. It’s not for sale.” Perkins said and Billy Simpson turned and quick left the store. “There have been so many strangers in town since the soldiers arrived.” Perkins said.
“You know. Every army has its followers and hangers on.” Jack Richmond said.
“Well, were going to have to keep a closer eye on things as long as they’re around.” Perkins said.

Billy Simpson rode into the cavalry camp. The soldiers familiar with the sight of him did not interfere as he rode through the camp up to the commander’s tent. He dismounted and walked up to the orderly in front of the tent. The orderly snapped to attention from his leisurely posture.
“Billy Simpson to see Captain Noonan.”
“Yes sir, Mr. Simpson.” The orderly responded then walked into the tent returning after a minute.
“The captain said go right in Mr. Simpson.”
Captain Noonan was seated behind a folding table. Some of the buttons of his uniform were unbutton. He was smoking a cigar. “Have a seat Simpson, Cigar?” The captain asked then reclined in his chair putting his feet on the table. “What do you have for me?” He asked.
“I think we’ve found him.”
“Found who?”
“The rebel organizer.”
“Really?” Captain Noonan asked and put his feet back on the ground and sat up at the table.
“What makes you think it’s him?”
“We came here because it was the center of all the rebel activity, right?” Billy Simpson said maneuvering around to stand in front of Captain Noonan.
“Right.”
“Well this guy, Brogan. The townspeople have been talking about him. He’s been acting strange since we arrived, and it seems that he was a rebel officer during the war. He showed up here out of the blue.”
“So?”
“So his neighbor saw him today seeding his field, he’s carrying a gun. How many farmers do you know that carry a gun when they’re working a field?” Billy Simpson asked.
Captain Noonan struck a match and lit a fresh cigar. “It’s something. We can at least check him out. Send a detachment to watch his house.” Captain Noonan said then captain puffed his cigar to stoke it. “And Smith, make sure he knows we know. Maybe we can trip him up.”
Billy Simpson started moving before the captain finished his sentence. He smiled broadly as he walked out of the tent. As was their protocol, Sergeant Pinket or one of his men always kept an eye on Simpson. When Simpson exited the tent with his hat off and led his horse out of camp on foot, it was a signal to Pinket and his men that it was okay to talk to him.
“Sergeant Pinket.” Billy Simpson said as the sergeant approached him as he passed by the sergeant’s camp.
“You have work for us.” The sergeant asked as Billy Simpson stopped his horse to talk.
“There is a certain farm that I want you to observe in the fashion that we are accustomed to.”
“And who is the person to be observed?” The sergeant asked.
“A certain ex-confederate residing on one of the local farms going by the name of Brogan, John Brogan.”
“Brogan huh.”
“Yes, and the captain told me to tell you that you are to let him know he is being observed.”
“Really?” The sergeant asked giving Billy Simpson a sardonic smile.
“Me men and I will get right on it.” The sergeant said and walked back to his camp. Billy Simpson left the bivouac and headed back to town.

